30.12.2006       EN              Official Journal of the European Union                    L 396/1




                                                   I

                               (Acts whose publication is obligatory)




             REGULATION (EC) No 1907/2006 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT
                                    AND OF THE COUNCIL


                                       of 18 December 2006


                   concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and
       Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency,
      amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93
                      and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as
              Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC,
                             93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC




THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION,

Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular Article 95
thereof,

Having regard to the proposal from the Commission,

Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee1,

Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions2,

Acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 251 of the Treaty1,




1
       OJ C 112, 30.4.2004, p. 92 and OJ C 294, 25.11.2005, p. 38.
2
       OJ C 164, 5.7.2005, p. 78.
L 396/2           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


Whereas:

(1)        This Regulation should ensure a high level of protection of human health and the
           environment as well as the free movement of substances, on their own, in preparations and
           in articles, while enhancing competitiveness and innovation. This Regulation should also
           promote the development of alternative methods for the assessment of hazards of
           substances.

(2)        The efficient functioning of the internal market for substances can be achieved only
           if requirements for substances do not differ significantly from Member State to
           Member State.

(3)        A high level of human health and environmental protection should be ensured in the
           approximation of legislation on substances, with the goal of achieving sustainable
           development. That legislation should be applied in a non-discriminatory manner whether
           substances are traded on the internal market or internationally in accordance with the
           Community's international commitments.

(4)        Pursuant to the implementation plan adopted on 4 September 2002 at the Johannesburg
           World Summit on sustainable development, the European Union is aiming to achieve that,
           by 2020, chemicals are produced and used in ways that lead to the minimisation of
           significant adverse effects on human health and the environment.




1
          Opinion of the European Parliament of 17 November 2005 (not yet published in the
          Official Journal), Council Common Position of 27 June 2006 (OJ C 276E, 14.11.2006, p. 1)
          and Position of the European Parliament of 13 December 2006 (not yet published in the
          Official Journal). Council Decision of 18 December 2006.
30.12.2006       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/3


(5)      This Regulation should apply without prejudice to Community workplace and environment
         legislation.

(6)      This Regulation should contribute to fulfilment of the Strategic Approach to International
         Chemical Management (SAICM) adopted on 6 February 2006 in Dubai.

(7)      To preserve the integrity of the internal market and to ensure a high level of protection for
         human health, especially the health of workers, and the environment, it is necessary to
         ensure that manufacturing of substances in the Community complies with Community law,
         even if those substances are exported.

(8)      Special account should be taken of the potential impact of this Regulation on small- and
         medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and the need to avoid any discrimination against them.
L 396/4           EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


(9)        The assessment of the operation of the four main legal instruments governing chemicals in
           the Community, i.e. Council Directive 67/548/EEC of 27 June 1967 on the approximation
           of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification,
           packaging and labelling of dangerous substances1, Council Directive 76/769/EEC of
           27 July 1976 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
           of the Member States relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous
           substances and preparations2, Directive 1999/45/EC of the European Parliament and of the
           Council of 31 May 1999 concerning the approximation of the laws, regulations and
           administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the classification, packaging and
           labelling of dangerous preparations3 and Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 of
           23 March 1993 on the evaluation and control of the risks of existing substances4, identified
           a number of problems in the functioning of Community legislation on chemicals, resulting
           in disparities between the laws, regulations and administrative provisions in Member States
           directly affecting the functioning of the internal market in this field, and the need to do
           more to protect public health and the environment in accordance with the precautionary
           principle.




1
          OJ 196, 16.8.1967, p. 1. Directive as last amended by Commission Directive 2004/73/EC
          (OJ L 152, 30.4.2004, p. 1). Corrected in OJ L 216, 16.6.2004, p. 3.
2
          OJ L 262, 27.9.1976, p. 201. Directive as last amended by Directive 2005/90/EC of the
          European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 33, 4.2.2006, p. 28).
3
          OJ L 200, 30.7.1999, p. 1. Directive as last amended by Commission Directive 2006/8/EC
          (OJ L 19, 24.1.2006, p. 12).
4
          OJ L 84, 5.4.1993, p. 1. Regulation as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003 of the
          European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 284, 31.10.2003, p. 1).
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/5


(10)     Substances under customs supervision which are in temporary storage, in free zones or free
         warehouses with a view to re-exportation or in transit are not used within the meaning of
         this Regulation and should therefore be excluded from its scope. The carriage of dangerous
         substances and of dangerous preparations by rail, road, inland waterways, sea or air should
         also be excluded from its scope as specific legislation already applies to such carriage.

(11)     To ensure workability and to maintain the incentives for waste recycling and recovery,
         wastes should not be regarded as substances, preparations or articles within the meaning of
         this Regulation.

(12)     An important objective of the new system to be established by this Regulation is to
         encourage and in certain cases to ensure that substances of high concern are eventually
         replaced by less dangerous substances or technologies where suitable economically and
         technically viable alternatives are available. This Regulation does not affect the application
         of Directives on worker protection and the environment, especially Directive 2004/37/EC
         of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the protection of
         workers from the risks related to exposure to carcinogens or mutagens at work
         (Sixth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Council
         Directive 89/391/EEC)1 and Council Directive 98/24/EC of 7 April 1998 on the protection
         of the health and safety of workers from the risks related to chemical agents at work
         (fourteenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of
         Directive 89/391/EEC)2 under which employers are required to eliminate dangerous
         substances, wherever technically possible, or to substitute dangerous substances with less
         dangerous substances.




1
       OJ L 158, 30.4.2004, p. 50. Corrected in OJ L 229, 29.6.2004, p. 23.
2
       OJ L 131, 5.5.1998, p. 11.
L 396/6           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


(13)       This Regulation should apply without prejudice to the prohibitions and restrictions laid
           down in Council Directive 76/768/EEC of 27 July 1976 on the approximation of the laws
           of the Member States relating to cosmetic products1 in so far as substances are used and
           marketed as cosmetic ingredients and are within the scope of this Regulation. A phase-out
           of testing on vertebrate animals for the purpose of protecting human health as specified in
           Directive 76/768/EEC should take place with regard to the uses of those substances in
           cosmetics.

(14)       This Regulation will generate information on substances and their uses. Available
           information, including that generated by this Regulation, should be used by the relevant
           actors in the application and implementation of appropriate Community legislation, for
           example that covering products, and Community voluntary instruments, such as the
           eco-labelling scheme. The Commission should consider in the review and development of
           relevant Community legislation and voluntary instruments how information generated by
           this Regulation should be used, and examine possibilities for establishing a European
           quality mark.




1
          OJ L 262, 27.9.1976, p. 169. Directive as last amended by Commission
          Directive 2005/80/EC (OJ L 303, 22.11.2005, p. 32).
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/7


(15)     There is a need to ensure effective management of the technical, scientific and
         administrative aspects of this Regulation at Community level. A central entity should
         therefore be created to fulfil this role. A feasibility study on the resource requirements for
         this central entity concluded that an independent central entity offered a number of
         long-term advantages over other options. A European Chemicals Agency (hereinafter
         referred to as "the Agency") should therefore be established.

(16)     This Regulation lays down specific duties and obligations on manufacturers, importers and
         downstream users of substances on their own, in preparations and in articles. This
         Regulation is based on the principle that industry should manufacture, import or use
         substances or place them on the market with such responsibility and care as may be
         required to ensure that, under reasonably foreseeable conditions, human health and the
         environment are not adversely affected.

(17)     All available and relevant information on substances on their own, in preparations and in
         articles should be collected to assist in identifying hazardous properties, and
         recommendations about risk management measures should systematically be conveyed
         through supply chains, as reasonably necessary, to prevent adverse effects on human health
         and the environment. In addition, communication of technical advice to support risk
         management should be encouraged in the supply chain, where appropriate.

(18)     Responsibility for the management of the risks of substances should lie with the natural or
         legal persons that manufacture, import, place on the market or use these substances.
         Information on the implementation of this Regulation should be easily accessible, in
         particular for SMEs.
L 396/8          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


(19)      Therefore, the registration provisions should require manufacturers and importers to
          generate data on the substances they manufacture or import, to use these data to assess the
          risks related to these substances and to develop and recommend appropriate risk
          management measures. To ensure that they actually meet these obligations, as well as for
          transparency reasons, registration should require them to submit a dossier containing all
          this information to the Agency. Registered substances should be allowed to circulate on the
          internal market.

(20)      The evaluation provisions should provide for follow-up to registration, by allowing for
          checks on whether registrations are in compliance with the requirements of this Regulation
          and if necessary by allowing for generation of more information on the properties of
          substances. If the Agency in cooperation with the Member States considers that there are
          grounds for considering that a substance constitutes a risk to human health or the
          environment, the Agency should, after having included the substance in the Community
          rolling action plan for substance evaluation, relying on the competent authorities of
          Member States, ensure that this substance is evaluated.

(21)      Although the information yielded on substances through evaluation should be used in the
          first place by manufacturers and importers to manage the risks related to their substances,
          it may also be used to initiate the authorisation or restrictions procedures under this
          Regulation or risk management procedures under other Community legislation. Therefore
          it should be ensured that this information is available to the competent authorities and may
          be used by them for the purpose of such procedures.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                          L 396/9


(22)     The authorisation provisions should ensure the good functioning of the internal market
         while assuring that the risks from substances of very high concern are properly controlled.
         Authorisations for the placing on the market and use should be granted by the Commission
         only if the risks arising from their use are adequately controlled, where this is possible, or
         the use can be justified for socio-economic reasons and no suitable alternatives are
         available, which are economically and technically viable.

(23)     The restriction provisions should allow the manufacturing, placing on the market and use
         of substances presenting risks that need to be addressed, to be made subject to total or
         partial bans or other restrictions, based on an assessment of those risks.

(24)     In preparation for this Regulation, the Commission has launched REACH Implementation
         Projects (RIPs), involving relevant experts from stakeholder groups. Some of those
         projects aim at developing draft guidelines and tools which should help the Commission,
         the Agency, Member States, manufacturers, importers and downstream users of substances
         to fulfil, in concrete terms, their obligations under this Regulation. This work should
         enable the Commission and the Agency to make available appropriate technical guidance,
         in due time, with regard to the deadlines introduced by this Regulation.
L 396/10          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


(25)       The responsibility to assess the risks and hazards of substances should be given, in the
           first place, to the natural or legal persons that manufacture or import substances, but only
           when they do so in quantities exceeding a certain volume, to enable them to carry the
           associated burden. Natural or legal persons handling chemicals should take the necessary
           risk management measures in accordance with the assessment of the risks of substances
           and pass on relevant recommendations along the supply chain. This should include
           describing, documenting and notifying in an appropriate and transparent fashion the risks
           stemming from the production, use and disposal of each substance.

(26)       In order to undertake chemical safety assessments of substances effectively, manufacturers
           and importers of substances should obtain information on these substances, if necessary by
           performing new tests.

(27)       For purposes of enforcement and evaluation and for reasons of transparency, the
           information on these substances, as well as related information, including on risk
           management measures, should normally be submitted to authorities.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/11


(28)     Scientific research and development normally takes place in quantities below 1 tonne
         per year. There is no need to exempt such research and development because substances in
         those quantities do not have to be registered in any case. However, in order to encourage
         innovation, product and process oriented research and development should be exempted
         from the obligation to register for a certain time period where a substance is not yet
         intended to be placed on the market to an indefinite number of customers because its
         application in preparations or articles still requires further research and development
         performed by the potential registrant himself or in cooperation with a limited number of
         known customers. In addition, it is appropriate to provide for a similar exemption to
         downstream users using the substance for the purposes of product and process oriented
         research and development, provided that the risks to human health and the environment are
         adequately controlled in accordance with the requirements of legislation for the protection
         of workers and the environment.

(29)     Since producers and importers of articles should be responsible for their articles, it is
         appropriate to impose a registration requirement on substances which are intended to be
         released from articles and have not been registered for that use. In the case of substances of
         very high concern which are present in articles above tonnage and concentration
         thresholds, where exposure to the substance cannot be excluded and where the substance
         has not been registered by any person for this use, the Agency should be notified. The
         Agency should also be empowered to request that a registration be submitted if it has
         grounds for suspecting that the release of a substance from the article may present a risk to
         human health or the environment and the substance is present in those articles in quantities
         totalling over 1 tonne per producer or importer per year. The Agency should consider the
         need for a proposal for a restriction where it considers that the use of such substances in
         articles poses a risk to human health or the environment that is not adequately controlled.
L 396/12           EN               Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


(30)       The requirements for undertaking chemical safety assessments by manufacturers and
           importers should be defined in detail in a technical annex to allow them to meet their
           obligations. To achieve fair burden sharing with their customers, manufacturers and
           importers should in their chemical safety assessment address not only their own uses and
           the uses for which they place their substances on the market, but also all uses which their
           customers ask them to address.

(31)       The Commission, in close cooperation with industry, Member States and other relevant
           stakeholders, should develop guidance to fulfil the requirements under this Regulation
           related to preparations (in particular with regard to safety data sheets incorporating
           exposure scenarios) including assessment of substances incorporated into special
           preparations – such as metals incorporated in alloys. In doing so, the Commission should
           take full account of the work that will have been carried out within the framework of the
           RIPs and should include the necessary guidance on this matter in the overall REACH
           guidance package. This guidance should be available before the application of this
           Regulation.

(32)       A chemical safety assessment should not need to be performed for substances in
           preparations in certain very small concentrations which are considered as not giving rise to
           concern. Substances in preparations in such low concentrations should also be exempt
           from authorisation. These provisions should apply equally to preparations that are solid
           mixtures of substances until a specific shape is given to such a preparation that transforms
           it into an article.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/13


(33)     Joint submission and the sharing of information on substances should be provided for in
         order to increase the efficiency of the registration system, to reduce costs and to reduce
         testing on vertebrate animals. One of a group of multiple registrants should submit
         information on behalf of the others according to rules which ensure that all the required
         information is submitted, while allowing sharing of the costs burden. A registrant should
         be able to submit information directly to the Agency in certain specified cases.

(34)     Requirements for generation of information on substances should be tiered according to the
         volumes of manufacture or importation of a substance, because these provide an indication
         of the potential for exposure of man and the environment to the substances, and should be
         described in detail. To reduce the possible impact on low volume substances, new
         toxicological and ecotoxicological information should only be required for priority
         substances between 1 and 10 tonnes. For other substances in that quantity range there
         should be incentives to encourage manufacturers and importers to provide this information.

(35)     The Member States, the Agency and all interested parties should take full account of the
         results of the RIPs, in particular with regard to the registration of substances which occur
         in nature.

(36)     It is necessary to consider the application of Article 2(7)(a) and (b) and Annex XI to
         substances derived from mineralogical processes and the review of Annexes IV and V
         should fully take this into account.
L 396/14           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


(37)       If tests are performed, they should comply with the relevant requirements of protection of
           laboratory animals, set out in Council Directive 86/609/EEC of 24 November 1986 on the
           approximation of laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States
           regarding the protection of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes1,
           and, in the case of ecotoxicological and toxicological tests, good laboratory practice,
           set out in Directive 2004/10/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
           11 February 2004 on the harmonisation of laws, regulations and administrative provisions
           relating to the application of the principles of good laboratory practice and the verification
           of their application for tests on chemical substances2.

(38)       The generation of information by alternative means offering equivalence to prescribed tests
           and test methods should also be allowed, for example when this information comes from
           valid qualitative or quantitative structure activity models or from structurally related
           substances. To this end the Agency, in cooperation with Member States and interested
           parties, should develop appropriate guidance. It should also be possible not to submit
           certain information if appropriate justification can be provided. Based on experience
           gained through RIPs, criteria should be developed defining what constitutes such
           justification.

(39)       In order to help companies, and in particular SMEs, to comply with the requirements of
           this Regulation, Member States, in addition to the operational guidance documents
           provided by the Agency, should establish national helpdesks.




1
       OJ L 358, 18.12.1986, p. 1. Directive as amended by Directive 2003/65/EC of the
       European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 230, 16.9.2003, p. 32).
2
       OJ L 50, 20.2.2004, p. 44.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/15


(40)     The Commission, Member States, industry and other stakeholders should continue to
         contribute to the promotion of alternative test methods on an international and national
         level including computer supported methodologies, in vitro methodologies, such as
         appropriate, those based on toxicogenomics, and other relevant methodologies. The
         Community's strategy to promote alternative test methods is a priority and the Commission
         should ensure that within its future Research Framework Programmes and initiatives such
         as the Community Action Plan on the Protection and Welfare of Animals 2006-2010 this
         remains a priority topic. Participation of stakeholders and initiatives involving all
         interested parties should be sought.

(41)     For reasons of workability and because of their special nature, specific registration
         requirements should be laid down for intermediates. Polymers should be exempted from
         registration and evaluation until those that need to be registered due to the risks posed to
         human health or the environment can be selected in a practicable and cost-efficient way on
         the basis of sound technical and valid scientific criteria.

(42)     To avoid overloading authorities and natural or legal persons with the work arising from
         the registration of phase-in substances already on the internal market, that registration
         should be spread over an appropriate period of time, without introducing undue delay.
         Deadlines for the registration of these substances should therefore be set.

(43)     Data for substances already notified in accordance with Directive 67/548/EEC should be
         eased into the system and should be upgraded when the next tonnage quantity threshold is
         reached.
L 396/16           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


(44)       In order to provide a harmonised, simple system, all registrations should be submitted to
           the Agency. To ensure a consistent approach and efficient use of resources, it should
           perform a completeness check on all registrations and take responsibility for any final
           rejections of registrations.

(45)       The European Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemical Substances (EINECS) included
           certain complex substances in a single entry. UVCB substances (substances of unknown or
           variable composition, complex reaction products or biological materials) may be registered
           as a single substance under this Regulation, despite their variable composition, provided
           that the hazardous properties do not differ significantly and warrant the same classification.

(46)       To ensure that the information gathered through the registration is kept up-to-date, an
           obligation on registrants to inform the Agency of certain changes to the information should
           be introduced.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/17


(47)     In accordance with Directive 86/609/EEC, it is necessary to replace, reduce or refine
         testing on vertebrate animals. Implementation of this Regulation should be based on the
         use of alternative test methods, suitable for the assessment of health and environmental
         hazards of chemicals, wherever possible. The use of animals should be avoided by
         recourse to alternative methods validated by the Commission or international bodies, or
         recognised by the Commission or the Agency as appropriate to meet the information
         requirements under this Regulation. To this end, the Commission, following consultation
         with relevant stakeholders, should propose to amend the future Commission Regulation on
         test methods or this Regulation, where appropriate, to replace, reduce or refine animal
         testing. The Commission and the Agency should ensure that reduction of animal testing is
         a key consideration in the development and maintenance of guidance for stakeholders and
         in the Agency's own procedures.

(48)     This Regulation should be without prejudice to the full and complete application of the
         Community competition rules.

(49)     In order to avoid duplication of work, and in particular to reduce testing involving
         vertebrate animals, the provisions concerning preparation and submission of registrations
         and updates should require sharing of information where this is requested by any registrant.
         If the information concerns vertebrate animals, the registrant should be obliged to request
         it.
L 396/18           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


(50)       It is in the public interest to ensure the quickest possible circulation of test results on
           human health or environmental hazards of certain substances to those natural or legal
           persons which use them, in order to limit any risks associated with their use. Sharing of
           information should occur where this is requested by any registrant, in particular in the case
           of information involving tests on vertebrate animals, under conditions that ensure a fair
           compensation for the company that has undertaken the tests.

(51)       In order to strengthen the competitiveness of Community industry and to ensure that this
           Regulation is applied as efficiently as possible, it is appropriate to make provision for the
           sharing of data between registrants on the basis of fair compensation.

(52)       In order to respect the legitimate property rights of those generating testing data, the owner
           of such data should, for a period of 12 years, be able to claim compensation from those
           registrants who benefit from that data.

(53)       In order to allow a potential registrant of a phase-in substance to proceed with his
           registration, even if he cannot reach agreement with a previous registrant, the Agency, on
           request, should allow use of any summary or robust study summary of tests already
           submitted. The registrant who receives these data should be obliged to pay a contribution
           to the costs to the owner of the data. For non-phase-in substances, the Agency may ask for
           evidence that a potential registrant has paid the owner of a study before the Agency gives
           permission for the potential registrant to use that information in his registration.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/19


(54)     In order to avoid duplication of work, and in particular to avoid duplication of testing,
         registrants of phase-in substances should pre-register as early as possible with a database
         managed by the Agency. A system should be established in order to provide for the
         establishment of Substance Information Exchange Fora (SIEF) to help exchange of
         information on the substances that have been registered. SIEF participants should include
         all relevant actors submitting information to the Agency on the same phase-in substance.
         They should include both potential registrants, who must provide and be supplied with any
         information relevant to the registration of their substances, and other participants, who may
         receive financial compensation for studies they hold but are not entitled to request
         information. In order to ensure the smooth functioning of that system they should fulfil
         certain obligations. If a member of a SIEF does not fulfil his obligations, he should be
         penalised accordingly but other members should be enabled to continue preparing their
         own registration. In cases where a substance has not been pre-registered, measures should
         be taken to help downstream users find alternative sources of supply.

(55)     Manufacturers and importers of a substance on its own or in a preparation should be
         encouraged to communicate with the downstream users of the substance with regard to
         whether they intend to register the substance. Such information should be provided to a
         downstream user sufficiently in advance of the relevant registration deadline if the
         manufacturer or importer does not intend to register the substance, in order to enable the
         downstream user to look for alternative sources of supply.
L 396/20          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


(56)       Part of the responsibility of manufacturers or importers for the management of the risks of
           substances is the communication of information on these substances to other professionals
           such as downstream users or distributors. In addition, producers or importers of articles
           should supply information on the safe use of articles to industrial and professional users,
           and consumers on request. This important responsibility should also apply throughout the
           supply chain to enable all actors to meet their responsibility in relation to management of
           risks arising from the use of substances.

(57)       As the existing safety data sheet is already being used as a communication tool within the
           supply chain of substances and preparations, it is appropriate to develop it further and
           make it an integral part of the system established by this Regulation.

(58)       In order to have a chain of responsibilities, downstream users should be responsible for
           assessing the risks arising from their uses of substances if those uses are not covered by a
           safety data sheet received from their suppliers, unless the downstream user concerned takes
           more protective measures than those recommended by his supplier or unless his supplier
           was not required to assess those risks or provide him with information on those risks. For
           the same reason, downstream users should manage the risks arising from their uses of
           substances. In addition, it is appropriate that any producer or importer of an article
           containing a substance of very high concern should provide sufficient information to allow
           safe use of such an article.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/21


(59)     The requirements for undertaking chemical safety assessments by downstream users
         should also be prescribed in detail to allow them to meet their obligations. These
         requirements should only apply above a total quantity of 1 tonne of substance or
         preparation. In any case, however, the downstream users should consider the use and
         identify and apply appropriate risk management measures. Downstream users should
         report certain basic information on use to the Agency.

(60)     For enforcement and evaluation purposes, downstream users of substances should be
         required to report to the Agency certain basic information if their use is outside the
         conditions of the exposure scenario detailed in the safety data sheet communicated by their
         original manufacturer or importer and to keep such reported information up-to-date.

(61)     For reasons of workability and proportionality, it is appropriate to exempt downstream
         users using low quantities of a substance from such reporting.

(62)     Communication up and down the supply chain should be facilitated. The Commission
         should develop a system categorising brief general descriptions of uses taking into account
         the outcomes of the RIPs.

(63)     It is also necessary to ensure that generation of information is tailored to real information
         needs. To this end evaluation should require the Agency to decide on the programmes of
         testing proposed by manufacturers and importers. In cooperation with Member States, the
         Agency should give priority to certain substances, for instance those which may be of very
         high concern.
L 396/22          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


(64)       In order to prevent unnecessary animal testing, interested parties should have a period of
           45 days during which they may provide scientifically valid information and studies that
           address the relevant substance and hazard end-point, which is addressed by the testing
           proposal. The scientifically valid information and studies received by the Agency should
           be taken into account for decisions on testing proposals.

(65)       In addition, it is necessary to instil confidence in the general quality of registrations and to
           ensure that the public at large as well as all stakeholders in the chemicals industry have
           confidence that natural or legal persons are meeting the obligations placed upon them.
           Accordingly, it is appropriate to provide for recording which information has been
           reviewed by an assessor possessing appropriate experience, and for a percentage of
           registrations to be checked for compliance by the Agency.

(66)       The Agency should also be empowered to require further information from manufacturers,
           importers or downstream users on substances suspected of posing a risk to human health or
           the environment, including by reason of their presence on the internal market in high
           volumes, on the basis of evaluations performed. Based on the criteria for prioritising
           substances developed by the Agency in cooperation with the Member States a Community
           rolling action plan for substance evaluation should be established, relying on Member State
           competent authorities to evaluate substances included therein. If a risk equivalent to the
           level of concern arising from the use of substances subject to authorisation arises from the
           use of isolated intermediates on site, the competent authorities of the Member States
           should also be allowed to require further information, when justified.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/23


(67)     Collective agreement within the Agency's Member State Committee on its draft decisions
         should provide the basis for an efficient system that respects the principle of subsidiarity,
         while maintaining the internal market. If one or more Member States or the Agency do not
         agree to a draft decision, it should be adopted subject to a centralised procedure. If the
         Member State Committee fails to reach unanimous agreement, the Commission should
         adopt a decision in accordance with a Committee procedure.

(68)     Evaluation may lead to the conclusion that action should be taken under the restriction or
         authorisation procedures or that risk management action should be considered in the
         framework of other appropriate legislation. Information on the progress of evaluation
         proceedings should therefore be made public.

(69)     To ensure a sufficiently high level of protection for human health, including having regard
         to relevant human population groups and possibly to certain vulnerable sub-populations,
         and the environment, substances of very high concern should, in accordance with the
         precautionary principle, be subject to careful attention. Authorisation should be granted
         where natural or legal persons applying for an authorisation demonstrate to the granting
         authority that the risks to human health and the environment arising from the use of the
         substance are adequately controlled. Otherwise, uses may still be authorised if it can be
         shown that the socio-economic benefits from the use of the substance outweigh the risks
         connected with its use and there are no suitable alternative substances or technologies that
         are economically and technically viable. Taking into account the good functioning of the
         internal market it is appropriate that the Commission should be the granting authority.
L 396/24          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


(70)       Adverse effects on human health and the environment from substances of very high
           concern should be prevented through the application of appropriate risk management
           measures to ensure that any risks from the uses of a substance are adequately controlled,
           and with a view to progressively substituting these substances with a suitable safer
           substance. Risk management measures should be applied to ensure, when substances are
           manufactured, placed on the market and used, that exposure to these substances including
           discharges, emissions and losses, throughout the whole life-cycle is below the threshold
           level beyond which adverse effects may occur. For any substance for which authorisation
           has been granted, and for any other substance for which it is not possible to establish a safe
           level of exposure, measures should always be taken to minimise, as far as technically and
           practically possible, exposure and emissions with a view to minimising the likelihood of
           adverse effects. Measures to ensure adequate control should be identified in any Chemical
           Safety Report. These measures should be applied and, where appropriate, recommended to
           other actors down the supply chain.

(71)       Methodologies to establish thresholds for carcinogenic and mutagenic substances may be
           developed taking into account the outcomes of RIPs. The relevant Annex may be amended
           on the basis of these methodologies to allow thresholds where appropriate to be used while
           ensuring a high level of protection of human health and the environment.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/25


(72)     To support the aim of eventual replacement of substances of very high concern by suitable
         alternative substances or technologies, all applicants for authorisation should provide an
         analysis of alternatives considering their risks and the technical and economic feasibility of
         substitution, including information on any research and development the applicant is
         undertaking or intends to undertake. Furthermore, authorisations should be subject to
         time-limited review whose periods would be determined on a case-by-case basis and
         normally be subject to conditions, including monitoring.

(73)     Substitution of a substance on its own, in a preparation or in an article should be required
         when manufacture, use or placing on the market of that substance causes an unacceptable
         risk to human health or to the environment, taking into account the availability of suitable
         safer alternative substances and technologies, and the socio-economic benefits from the
         uses of the substance posing an unacceptable risk.

(74)     Substitution of a substance of very high concern by suitable safer alternative substances or
         technologies should be considered by all those applying for authorisations of uses of such
         substances on their own, in preparations or for incorporation of substances into articles by
         making an analysis of alternatives, the risks involved in using any alternative and the
         technical and economic feasibility of substitution.

(75)     The possibility of introducing restrictions on the manufacturing, placing on the market and
         use of dangerous substances, preparations and articles applies to all substances falling
         within the scope of this Regulation, with minor exemptions. Restrictions on the placing on
         the market and the use of substances which are carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic to
         reproduction, category 1 or 2, for their use by consumers on their own or in preparations
         should continue to be introduced.
L 396/26          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


(76)       Experience at international level shows that substances with characteristics rendering them
           persistent, liable to bioaccumulate and toxic, or very persistent and very liable to
           bioaccumulate, present a very high concern, while criteria have been developed allowing
           the identification of such substances. For certain other substances concerns are sufficiently
           high to address them in the same way on a case-by-case basis. The criteria in Annex XIII
           should be reviewed taking into account the current and any new experience in the
           identification of these substances and if appropriate, be amended with a view to ensuring a
           high level of protection for human health and the environment.

(77)       In view of workability and practicality considerations, both as regards natural or legal
           persons, who have to prepare application files and take appropriate risk management
           measures, and as regards the authorities, who have to process authorisation applications,
           only a limited number of substances should be subjected to the authorisation procedure at
           the same time and realistic deadlines should be set for applications, while allowing certain
           uses to be exempted. Substances identified as meeting the criteria for authorisation should
           be included in a candidate list for eventual inclusion in the authorisation procedure. Within
           this list, substances on the Agency's work programme should be clearly identified.

(78)       The Agency should provide advice on the prioritisation of substances to be made subject to
           the authorisation procedure, to ensure that decisions reflect the needs of society as well as
           scientific knowledge and developments.

(79)       A total ban on a substance would mean that none of its uses could be authorised. It would
           therefore be pointless to allow the submission of applications for authorisation. In such
           cases the substance should be removed from the list of substances for which applications
           can be submitted and added to the list of restricted substances.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/27


(80)     The proper interaction between the provisions on authorisation and restriction should be
         ensured in order to preserve the efficient functioning of the internal market and the
         protection of human health, safety and the environment. Restrictions that exist when the
         substance in question is added to the list of substances for which applications for
         authorisation can be submitted, should be maintained for that substance. The Agency
         should consider whether the risk from substances in articles is adequately controlled and, if
         it is not, prepare a dossier in relation to introduction of further restrictions for substances
         for which the use requires authorisation.

(81)     In order to provide a harmonised approach to the authorisation of the uses of particular
         substances, the Agency should issue opinions on the risks arising from those uses,
         including whether or not the substance is adequately controlled and on any socio-economic
         analysis submitted to it by third parties. These opinions should be taken into account by the
         Commission when considering whether or not to grant an authorisation.

(82)     To allow effective monitoring and enforcement of the authorisation requirement,
         downstream users benefiting from an authorisation granted to their supplier should inform
         the Agency of their use of the substance.

(83)     It is suitable in these circumstances that final decisions granting or refusing authorisations
         be adopted by the Commission pursuant to a regulatory procedure in order to allow for an
         examination of their wider implications within the Member States and to associate the
         latter more closely with the decisions.
L 396/28          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


(84)       In order to accelerate the current system the restriction procedure should be restructured
           and Directive 76/769/EEC, which has been substantially amended and adapted several
           times, should be replaced. In the interests of clarity and as a starting point for this new
           accelerated restriction procedure, all the restrictions developed under that Directive should
           be incorporated into this Regulation. Where appropriate, the application of Annex XVII of
           this Regulation should be facilitated by guidance developed by the Commission.

(85)       In relation to Annex XVII Member States should be allowed to maintain for a transitional
           period more stringent restrictions, provided that these restrictions have been notified
           according to the Treaty. This should concern substances on their own, substances in
           preparations and substances in articles, the manufacturing, the placing on the market and
           the use of which is restricted. The Commission should compile and publish an inventory of
           these restrictions. This would provide an opportunity for the Commission to review the
           measures concerned with a view to possible harmonisation.

(86)       It should be the responsibility of the manufacturer, importer and downstream user to
           identify the appropriate risk management measures needed to ensure a high level of
           protection for human health and the environment from the manufacturing, placing on the
           market or use of a substance on its own, in a preparation or in an article. However, where
           this is considered to be insufficient and where Community legislation is justified,
           appropriate restrictions should be laid down.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/29


(87)     In order to protect human health and the environment, restrictions on the manufacture,
         placing on the market or use of a substance on its own, in a preparation or in an article may
         include any condition for, or prohibition of, the manufacture, placing on the market or use.
         Therefore it is necessary to list such restrictions and any amendments thereto.

(88)     In order to prepare a restrictions proposal and in order for such legislation to operate
         effectively, there should be good cooperation, coordination and information between the
         Member States, the Agency, other bodies of the Community, the Commission and the
         interested parties.

(89)     In order to give Member States the opportunity to submit proposals to address a specific
         risk for human health and the environment, they should prepare a dossier in conformity
         with detailed requirements. The dossier should set out the justification for
         Community-wide action.

(90)     In order to provide a harmonised approach to restrictions, the Agency should fulfil a role as
         coordinator of this procedure, for example by appointing the relevant rapporteurs and
         verifying conformity with the requirements of the relevant Annexes. The Agency should
         maintain a list of substances for which a restriction dossier is being prepared.

(91)     In order to give the Commission the opportunity to address a specific risk for human health
         and the environment that needs to be addressed Community wide, it should be able to
         entrust the Agency with the preparation of a restriction dossier.
L 396/30           EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


(92)       For reasons of transparency, the Agency should publish the relevant dossier including the
           suggested restrictions while requesting comments.

(93)       In order to finalise the procedure in due time, the Agency should submit its opinions on the
           suggested action and its impact on the basis of a draft opinion prepared by a rapporteur.

(94)       In order to speed up the procedure for restrictions, the Commission should prepare its draft
           amendment within a specific time limit of receiving the Agency's opinions.

(95)       The Agency should be central to ensuring that chemicals legislation and the
           decision-making processes and scientific basis underlying it have credibility with all
           stakeholders and the public. The Agency should also play a pivotal role in coordinating
           communication around this Regulation and in its implementation. The confidence in the
           Agency of the Community institutions, the Member States, the general public and
           interested parties is therefore essential. For this reason, it is vital to ensure its
           independence, high scientific, technical and regulatory capacities, as well as transparency
           and efficiency.

(96)       The structure of the Agency should be suitable for the tasks that it should fulfil. Experience
           with similar Community agencies provides some guidance in this respect but the structure
           should be adapted to meet the specific needs of this Regulation.

(97)       The effective communication of information on chemical risks and how they can be
           managed is an essential part of the system established by this Regulation. Best practice
           from the chemicals and other sectors should be considered in the preparation of guidance
           by the Agency to all stakeholders.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/31


(98)     In the interests of efficiency, the staff of the Agency Secretariat should perform essentially
         technical-administrative and scientific tasks without calling on the scientific and technical
         resources of the Member States. The Executive Director should ensure the efficient
         execution of the Agency's tasks in an independent manner. To ensure that the Agency
         fulfils its role, the composition of the Management Board should be designed to represent
         each Member State, the Commission and other interested parties appointed by the
         Commission in order to ensure the involvement of stakeholders, and the European
         Parliament and to secure the highest standard of competence and a broad range of relevant
         expertise in chemicals safety or the regulation of chemicals, whilst ensuring that there is
         relevant expertise in the field of general financial and legal matters.

(99)     The Agency should have the means to perform all the tasks required to carry out its role.

(100)    A Commission Regulation should specify the structure and amounts of fees, including
         specifying the circumstances under which a proportion of the fees will be transferred to the
         relevant Member State competent authority.

(101)    The Management Board of the Agency should have the necessary powers to establish the
         budget, check its implementation, draw up internal rules, adopt financial regulations and
         appoint the Executive Director.

(102)    Through a Committee for Risk Assessment and a Committee for Socio-economic Analysis,
         the Agency should take over the role of the Scientific Committees attached to the
         Commission in issuing scientific opinions in its field of competence.
L 396/32          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


(103)      Through a Member State Committee, the Agency should aim to reach agreement amongst
           Member States authorities on specific issues which require a harmonised approach.

(104)      It is necessary to ensure close cooperation between the Agency and the competent
           authorities working within the Member States so that the scientific opinions of the
           Committee for Risk Assessment and the Committee for Socio-economic Analysis are
           based on the broadest possible scientific and technical expertise appropriate which is
           available within the Community. To the same end, these Committees should be able to rely
           on additional particular expertise.

(105)      In the light of the increased responsibility of natural or legal persons for ensuring safe use
           of chemicals, enforcement needs to be strengthened. The Agency should therefore provide
           a Forum for Member States to exchange information on and to coordinate their activities
           related to the enforcement of chemicals legislation. The currently informal cooperation
           between Member States in this respect would benefit from a more formal framework.

(106)      A Board of Appeal should be set up within the Agency to guarantee processing of appeals
           for any natural or legal person affected by decisions taken by the Agency.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/33


(107)    The Agency should be financed partly by fees paid by natural or legal persons and partly
         by the general budget of the European Communities. The Community budgetary
         procedure should remain applicable as far as any subsidies chargeable to the general
         budget of the European Communities are concerned. Moreover, the auditing of accounts
         should be undertaken by the Court of Auditors in accordance with Article 91 of
         Commission Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2343/2002 of 23 December 2002 on
         the framework Financial Regulation for the bodies referred to in Article 185 of
         Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/2002 on the Financial Regulation applicable
         to the general budget of the European Communities1.

(108)    Where the Commission and Agency consider it appropriate, it should be possible for
         representatives of third countries to participate in the work of the Agency.

(109)    The Agency should contribute, through cooperation with organisations having interests in
         the harmonisation of international regulations, to the role of the Community and the
         Member States in such harmonisation activities. To promote broad international consensus
         the Agency should take account of existing and emerging international standards in the
         regulation of chemicals such as the Globally Harmonised System (GHS) of classification
         and labelling of chemicals.

(110)    The Agency should provide the infrastructure needed for natural or legal persons to meet
         their obligations under the data-sharing provisions.




1
        OJ L 357, 31.12.2002, p. 72.
L 396/34          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


(111)      It is important to avoid confusion between the mission of the Agency and the respective
           missions of the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) established by Regulation (EC)
           No 726/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 laying
           down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products
           for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency1, the
           European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) established by Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of
           the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2002 laying down the general
           principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority
           and laying down procedures in matters of food safety2 and the Advisory Committee
           on Safety, Hygiene and Health Protection at Work set up by the Council Decision of
           22 July 20033. Consequently, the Agency should establish rules of procedure where
           cooperation with the EFSA or the Advisory Committee on Safety, Hygiene and Health
           Protection at Work is necessary. This Regulation should otherwise be without prejudice to
           the competence conferred on the EMEA, the EFSA and the Advisory Committee on
           Safety, Hygiene and Health Protection at Work by Community legislation.

(112)      In order to achieve the functioning of the internal market for substances on their own or in
           preparations, while at the same time ensuring a high level of protection for human health
           and the environment, rules should be established for a classification and labelling
           inventory.

(113)      The classification and labelling for any substance either subject to registration or covered
           by Article 1 of Directive 67/548/EEC and placed on the market should therefore be
           notified to the Agency to be included in the inventory.




1
        OJ L 136, 30.4.2004, p. 1.
2
        OJ L 31, 1.2.2002, p. 1. Regulation as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1642/2003
        (OJ L 245, 29.9.2003, p. 4).
3
        OJ C 218, 13.9.2003, p. 1.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/35


(114)    To ensure a harmonised protection for the general public, and, in particular, for persons
         who come into contact with certain substances, and the proper functioning of other
         Community legislation relying on the classification and labelling, an inventory should
         record the classification in accordance with Directive 67/548/EEC and
         Directive 1999/45/EC agreed by manufacturers and importers of the same substance, if
         possible, as well as decisions taken at Community level to harmonise the classification and
         labelling of some substances. This should take full account of the work and experience
         accumulated in connection with the activities under Directive 67/548/EEC, including the
         classification and labelling of specific substances or groups of substances listed in Annex I
         of Directive 67/548/EEC.

(115)    Resources should be focused on substances of the highest concern. A substance should
         therefore be added to Annex I of Directive 67/548/EEC if it meets the criteria for
         classification as carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic for reproduction categories 1, 2 or 3, as a
         respiratory sensitiser, or in respect of other effects on a case-by-case basis. Provision
         should be made to enable competent authorities to submit proposals to the Agency. The
         Agency should give its opinion on the proposal while interested parties should have an
         opportunity to comment. The Commission should take a decision subsequently.

(116)    Regular reports by the Member States and the Agency on the operation of this Regulation
         will be an indispensable means of monitoring the implementation of this Regulation as
         well as trends in this field. Conclusions drawn from findings in the reports will be useful
         and practical tools for reviewing this Regulation and, where necessary, for formulating
         proposals for amendments.
L 396/36          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


(117)      EU-citizens should have access to information about chemicals to which they may be
           exposed, in order to allow them to make informed decisions about their use of chemicals.
           A transparent means of achieving this is to grant them free and easy access to basic data
           held in the Agency's database, including brief profiles of hazardous properties, labelling
           requirements and relevant Community legislation including authorised uses and risk
           management measures. The Agency and Member States should allow access to
           information in accordance with Directive 2003/4/EC of the European Parliament and
           of the Council of 28 January 2003 on public access to environmental information1,
           Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
           30 May 2001 regarding public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission
           documents2 and with the UNECE Convention on Access to Information, Public
           Participation in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters, to
           which the European Community is a party.

(118)      Disclosure of information under this Regulation is subject to the specific requirements of
           Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001. That Regulation sets binding deadlines for the release of
           information as well as procedural guarantees, including the right of appeal. The
           Management Board should adopt the practical arrangements for application of those
           requirements to the Agency.




1
        OJ L 41, 14.2.2003, p. 26.
2
        OJ L 145, 31.5.2001, p. 43.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/37


(119)    Apart from their participation in the implementation of Community legislation,
         Member State competent authorities should, because of their closeness to stakeholders in
         the Member States, play a role in the exchange of information on risks of substances and
         on the obligations of natural or legal persons under chemicals legislation. At the same time,
         close cooperation between the Agency, the Commission and the competent authorities of
         the Member States is necessary to ensure the coherence and efficiency of the global
         communication process.

(120)    In order for the system established by this Regulation to operate effectively, there should
         be good cooperation, coordination and exchange of information between the
         Member States, the Agency and the Commission regarding enforcement.

(121)    In order to ensure compliance with this Regulation, Member States should put in place
         effective monitoring and control measures. The necessary inspections should be planned,
         carried out and their results should be reported.

(122)    In order to ensure transparency, impartiality and consistency in the level of enforcement
         activities by Member States, it is necessary for Member States to set up an appropriate
         framework for penalties with a view to imposing effective, proportionate and dissuasive
         penalties for non-compliance, as non-compliance can result in damage to human health and
         the environment.
L 396/38          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


(123)      The measures necessary for the implementation of this Regulation and certain amendments
           to it should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999
           laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the
           Commission1.

(124)      In particular, power should be conferred on the Commission to amend the Annexes in
           certain cases, to set rules on test methods, to vary the percentage of dossiers selected for
           compliance checking and to modify the criteria for their selection, and to set the criteria
           defining what constitutes adequate justification that testing is technically not possible.
           Since these measures are of general scope and are designed to amend non-essential
           elements of this Regulation or supplement this Regulation by adding new non-essential
           elements thereto, they should be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with
           scrutiny provided for in Article 5a of Decision 1999/468/EC.

(125)      It is essential that chemicals be regulated in an effective and timely manner during the
           transition to full applicability of the provisions of this Regulation and, in particular, during
           the start-up period of the Agency. Provision should therefore be made for the Commission
           to provide the necessary support towards the setting up of the Agency, including the
           conclusion of contracts and the appointment of an Executive Director ad interim until the
           Agency's Management Board can appoint an Executive Director itself.




1
        OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23. Decision as amended by Council Decision 2006/512/EC
        (OJ L 200, 22.7.2006, p. 11).
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/39


(126)    To take full advantage of the work performed under Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 as well
         as under Directive 76/769/EEC and to avoid such work being lost, the Commission should
         be empowered during the start-up period to initiate restrictions based on that work without
         following the full restrictions procedure laid down in this Regulation. All those elements
         should be used, as soon as this Regulation enters into force, to support risk reduction
         measures.

(127)    It is appropriate for the provisions of this Regulation to enter into force in a staggered way
         to smooth the transition to the new system. Moreover, a gradual entry into force of the
         provisions should allow all parties involved, authorities, natural or legal persons as well as
         stakeholders, to focus resources in the preparation for new duties at the right times.

(128)    This Regulation replaces Directive 76/769/EEC, Commission Directive 91/155/EEC1,
         Commission Directive 93/67/EEC2, Commission Directive 93/105/EC3, Commission
         Directive 2000/21/EC4, Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC)
         No 1488/945. These Directives and Regulations should therefore be repealed.




1
        Commission Directive 91/155/EEC of 5 March 1991 defining and laying down the detailed
        arrangements for the system of specific information relating to dangerous preparations in
        implementation of Article 10 of Directive 88/379/EEC (OJ L 76, 22.3.1991, p. 35).
        Directive as last amended by Directive 2001/58/EC (OJ L 212, 7.8.2001, p. 24).
2
        Commission Directive 93/67/EEC of 20 July 1993 laying down the principles for
        assessment of risks to man and the environment of substances notified in accordance with
        Council Directive 67/548/EEC (OJ L 227, 8.9.1993, p. 9).
3
        Commission Directive 93/105/EC of 25 November 1993 laying down Annex VII D,
        containing information required for the technical dossier referred to in Article 12 of the
        seventh amendment of Council Directive 67/548/EEC (OJ L 294, 30.11.1993, p. 21).
4
        Commission Directive 2000/21/EC of 25 April 2000 concerning the list of Community
        legislation referred to in the fifth indent of Article 13(1) of Council Directive 67/548/EEC
        (OJ L 103, 28.4.2000, p. 70).
5
        Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 of 28 June 1994 laying down the principles for
        the assessment of risks to man and the environment of existing substances in accordance
        with Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 (OJ L 161, 29.6.1994, p. 3).
L 396/40          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


(129)      For the sake of consistency, Directive 1999/45/EC which already addresses matters
           covered by this Regulation should be amended.

(130)      Since the objectives of this Regulation, namely laying down rules for substances and
           establishing a European Chemicals Agency, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the
           Member States and can therefore be better achieved at Community level, the Community
           may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5
           of the Treaty. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article,
           this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.

(131)      The Regulation observes the fundamental rights and principles which are acknowledged in
           particular in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union1. In particular, it
           seeks to ensure full compliance with the principles of environmental protection and
           sustainable development guaranteed by Article 37 of that Charter,

HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:




1
        OJ C 364, 18.12.2000, p. 1.
30.12.2006   EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/41


                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS




TITLE I           GENERAL ISSUES

Chapter 1         Aim, scope and application

Chapter 2         Definitions and general provision

TITLE II          REGISTRATION OF SUBSTANCES

Chapter 1         General obligation to register and information requirements

Chapter 2         Substances regarded as being registered

Chapter 3         Obligation to register and information requirements for certain types
                  of isolated intermediates

Chapter 4         Common provisions for all registrations

Chapter 5         Transitional provisions applicable to phase-in substances and notified
                  substances
L 396/42    EN              Official Journal of the European Union               30.12.2006


TITLE III        DATA SHARING AND AVOIDANCE OF UNNECESSARY
                 TESTING

Chapter 1        Objectives and general rules

Chapter 2        Rules for non-phase-in substances and registrants of phase-in
                 substances who have not pre-registered

Chapter 3        Rules for phase-in-substances

TITLE IV         INFORMATION IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN

TITLE V          DOWNSTREAM USERS

TITLE VI         EVALUATION

Chapter 1        Dossier evaluation

Chapter 2        Substance evaluation

Chapter 3        Evaluation of intermediates

Chapter 4        Common provisions
30.12.2006   EN              Official Journal of the European Union   L 396/43


TITLE VII         AUTHORISATION

Chapter 1         Authorisation requirement

Chapter 2         Granting of authorisations

Chapter 3         Authorisations in the supply chain

TITLE VIII        RESTRICTIONS ON THE MANUFACTURING, PLACING ON
                  THE MARKET AND USE OF CERTAIN DANGEROUS
                  SUBSTANCES AND PREPARATIONS

Chapter 1         General issues

Chapter 2         Restrictions process

TITLE IX          FEES AND CHARGES

TITLE X           AGENCY

TITLE XI          CLASSIFICATION AND LABELLING INVENTORY

TITLE XII         INFORMATION

TITLE XIII        COMPETENT AUTHORITIES

TITLE XIV         ENFORCEMENT

TITLE XV          TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
L 396/44    EN           Official Journal of the European Union     30.12.2006


ANNEX I          GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ASSESSING SUBSTANCES AND
                 PREPARING CHEMICAL SAFETY REPORTS

ANNEX II         GUIDE TO THE COMPILATION OF SAFETY DATA SHEETS

ANNEX III        CRITERIA FOR SUBSTANCES REGISTERED IN QUANTITIES
                 BETWEEN 1 AND 10 TONNES

ANNEX IV         EXEMPTIONS FROM THE OBLIGATION TO REGISTER IN
                 ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 2(7)(a)

ANNEX V          EXEMPTIONS FROM THE OBLIGATION TO REGISTER IN
                 ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 2(7)(b)

ANNEX VI         INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS REFERRED TO IN
                 ARTICLE 10

ANNEX VII        STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR
                 SUBSTANCES MANUFACTURED OR IMPORTED IN
                 QUANTITIES OF 1 TONNE OR MORE
30.12.2006   EN             Official Journal of the European Union   L 396/45


ANNEX VIII        STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR
                  SUBSTANCES MANUFACTURED OR IMPORTED IN
                  QUANTITIES OF 10 TONNES OR MORE

ANNEX IX          STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR
                  SUBSTANCES MANUFACTURED OR IMPORTED IN
                  QUANTITIES OF 100 TONNES OR MORE

ANNEX X           STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR
                  SUBSTANCES MANUFACTURED OR IMPORTED IN
                  QUANTITIES OF 1 000 TONNES OR MORE

ANNEX XI          GENERAL RULES FOR ADAPTATION OF THE STANDARD
                  TESTING REGIME SET OUT IN ANNEXES VII TO X

ANNEX XII         GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR DOWNSTREAM USERS TO
                  ASSESS SUBSTANCES AND PREPARE CHEMICAL SAFETY
                  REPORTS
L 396/46     EN           Official Journal of the European Union   30.12.2006


ANNEX XIII        CRITERIA FOR THE IDENTIFICATION OF PERSISTENT,
                  BIOACCUMULATIVE AND TOXIC SUBSTANCES, AND VERY
                  PERSISTENT AND VERY BIOACCUMULATIVE SUBSTANCES

ANNEX XIV         LIST OF SUBSTANCES SUBJECT TO AUTHORISATION

ANNEX XV          DOSSIERS

ANNEX XVI         SOCIO-ECONOMIC ANALYSIS

ANNEX XVII        RESTRICTIONS ON THE MANUFACTURE, PLACING ON THE
                  MARKET AND USE OF CERTAIN DANGEROUS
                  SUBSTANCES, PREPARATIONS AND ARTICLES
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/47


                                               TITLE I
                                       GENERAL ISSUES


                                             Chapter 1
                               Aim, scope and application


                                                Article 1
                                             Aim and scope

1.       The purpose of this Regulation is to ensure a high level of protection of human health and
         the environment, including the promotion of alternative methods for assessment of hazards
         of substances, as well as the free circulation of substances on the internal market while
         enhancing competitiveness and innovation.

2.       This Regulation lays down provisions on substances and preparations within the meaning
         of Article 3. These provisions shall apply to the manufacture, placing on the market or use
         of such substances on their own, in preparations or in articles and to the placing on the
         market of preparations.

3.       This Regulation is based on the principle that it is for manufacturers, importers and
         downstream users to ensure that they manufacture, place on the market or use such
         substances that do not adversely affect human health or the environment. Its provisions are
         underpinned by the precautionary principle.
L 396/48          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006



                                                     Article 2
                                                 Application

1.         This Regulation shall not apply to:

           (a)   radioactive substances within the scope of Council Directive 96/29/Euratom of
                 13 May 1996 laying down basic safety standards for the protection of the health of
                 workers and the general public against the dangers arising from ionising radiation1;

           (b)   substances, on their own, in a preparation or in an article, which are subject to
                 customs supervision, provided that they do not undergo any treatment or processing,
                 and which are in temporary storage, or in a free zone or free warehouse with a view
                 to re-exportation, or in transit;

           (c)   non-isolated intermediates;

           (d)   the carriage of dangerous substances and dangerous substances in dangerous
                 preparations by rail, road, inland waterway, sea or air.

2.         Waste as defined in Directive 2006/12/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council2
           is not a substance, preparation or article within the meaning of Article 3 of this Regulation.

3.         Member States may allow for exemptions from this Regulation in specific cases for certain
           substances, on their own, in a preparation or in an article, where necessary in the interests
           of defence.




1
       OJ L 159, 29.6.1996, p. 1.
2
       OJ L 114, 27.4.2006, p. 9.
30.12.2006        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/49


4.       This Regulation shall apply without prejudice to:

         (a)     Community workplace and environmental legislation, including Council
                 Directive 89/391/EEC of 12 June 1989 on the introduction of measures to encourage
                 improvements in the safety and health of workers at work1, Council
                 Directive 96/61/EC of 24 September 1996 concerning integrated pollution prevention
                 and control2; Directive 98/24/EC, Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament
                 and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community
                 action in the field of water policy3 and Directive 2004/37/EC;

         (b)     Directive 76/768/EEC as regards testing involving vertebrate animals within the
                 scope of that Directive.

5.       The provisions of Titles II, V, VI and VII shall not apply to the extent that a substance is
         used:

         (a)     in medicinal products for human or veterinary use within the scope of
                 Regulation (EC) No 726/2004, Directive 2001/82/EC of the European Parliament
                 and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on the Community code relating to
                 veterinary medicinal products4 and Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament
                 and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on the Community code relating to
                 medicinal products for human use 5;




1
       OJ L 183, 29.6.1989, p. 1. Directive as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003.
2
       OJ L 257, 10.10.1996, p. 26. Directive as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 of
       the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 33, 4.2.2006, p. 1).
3
       OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1. Directive as amended by Decision No 2455/2001/EC of the
       European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 331, 15.12.2001, p. 1).
4
       OJ L 311, 28.11.2001, p. 1. Directive as last amended by Directive 2004/28/EC of the
       European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 136, 30.4.2004, p. 58).
5
       OJ L 311, 28.11.2001, p. 67. Directive as last amended by Directive 2004/27/EC of the
       European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 136, 30.4.2004, p. 34).
L 396/50           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


           (b)   in food or feedingstuffs in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 including
                 use:

                 (i)    as a food additive in foodstuffs within the scope of Council
                        Directive 89/107/EEC of 21 December 1988 on the approximation of the laws
                        of the Member States concerning food additives authorised for use in
                        foodstuffs intended for human consumption1;

                 (ii)   as a flavouring in foodstuffs within the scope of Council Directive 88/388/EEC
                        of 22 June 1988 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
                        relating to flavourings for use in foodstuffs and to source materials for their
                        production2 and Commission Decision 1999/217/EC of 23 February 1999
                        adopting a register of flavouring substances used in or on foodstuffs drawn up
                        in application of Regulation (EC) No 2232/96 of the European Parliament and
                        of the Council3;

                 (iii) as an additive in feedingstuffs within the scope of Regulation (EC)
                        No 1831/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
                        22 September 2003 on additives for use in animal nutrition4;

                 (iv) in animal nutrition within the scope of Council Directive 82/471/EEC of
                        30 June 1982 concerning certain products used in animal nutrition5.




1
       OJ L 40, 11.2.1989, p. 27. Directive as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003.
2
       OJ L 184, 15.7.1988, p. 61. Directive as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003.
3
       OJ L 84, 27.3.1999, p. 1. Decision as last amended by Decision 2004/357/EC (OJ L 113,
       20.4.2004, p. 28).
4
       OJ L 268, 18.10.2003, p. 29. Regulation as amended by Commission Regulation (EC)
       No 378/2005 (OJ L 59, 5.3.2005, p. 8).
5
       OJ L 213, 21.7.1982, p. 8. Directive as last amended by Commission Directive 2004/116/EC
       (OJ L 379, 24.12.2004, p. 81).
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                    L 396/51


6.       The provisions of Title IV shall not apply to the following preparations in the finished
         state, intended for the final user:

         (a)   medicinal products for human or veterinary use, within the scope of Regulation (EC)
               No 726/2004 and Directive 2001/82/EC and as defined in Directive 2001/83/EC;

         (b)   cosmetic products as defined in Directive 76/768/EEC;

         (c)   medical devices which are invasive or used in direct physical contact with the human
               body in so far as Community measures lay down provisions for the classification and
               labelling of dangerous substances and preparations which ensure the same level of
               information provision and protection as Directive 1999/45/EC;

         (d)   food or feedingstuffs in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 including
               use:

               (i)    as a food additive in foodstuffs within the scope of Directive 89/107/EEC;

               (ii)   as a flavouring in foodstuffs within the scope of Directive 88/388/EEC and
                      Decision 1999/217/EC;

               (iii) as an additive in feedingstuffs within the scope of Regulation (EC)
                      No 1831/2003;

               (iv) in animal nutrition within the scope of Directive 82/471/EEC.
L 396/52           EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


7.         The following shall be exempted from Titles II, V and VI:

           (a)   substances included in Annex IV, as sufficient information is known about these
                 substances that they are considered to cause minimum risk because of their intrinsic
                 properties;

           (b)   substances covered by Annex V, as registration is deemed inappropriate or
                 unnecessary for these substances and their exemption from these Titles does not
                 prejudice the objectives of this Regulation;

           (c)   substances on their own or in preparations, registered in accordance with Title II,
                 exported from the Community by an actor in the supply chain and re-imported into
                 the Community by the same or another actor in the same supply chain who shows
                 that:

                 (i)     the substance being re-imported is the same as the exported substance;

                 (ii)    he has been provided with the information in accordance with Articles 31 or 32
                         relating to the exported substance.

           (d)   substances, on their own, in preparations or in articles, which have been registered in
                 accordance with Title II and which are recovered in the Community if:

                 (i)     the substance that results from the recovery process is the same as the
                         substance that has been registered in accordance with Title II; and
30.12.2006         EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/53


                 (ii)   the information required by Articles 31 or 32 relating to the substance that has
                        been registered in accordance with Title II is available to the establishment
                        undertaking the recovery.

8.       On-site isolated intermediates and transported isolated intermediates shall be exempted
         from:

         (a)     Chapter 1 of Title II, with the exception of Articles 8 and 9; and

         (b)     Title VII.

9.       The provisions of Titles II and VI shall not apply to polymers.


                                               Chapter 2
                              Definitions and general provision


                                                  Article 3
                                                 Definitions

For the purposes of this Regulation:

1)       Substance: means a chemical element and its compounds in the natural state or obtained by
         any manufacturing process, including any additive necessary to preserve its stability and
         any impurity deriving from the process used, but excluding any solvent which may be
         separated without affecting the stability of the substance or changing its composition;
L 396/54          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                   30.12.2006


2)         Preparation: means a mixture or solution composed of two or more substances;

3)         Article: means an object which during production is given a special shape, surface or
           design which determines its function to a greater degree than does its chemical
           composition;

(4)        Producer of an article: means any natural or legal person who makes or assembles an
           article within the Community;

5)         Polymer: means a substance consisting of molecules characterised by the sequence of one
           or more types of monomer units. Such molecules must be distributed over a range of
           molecular weights wherein differences in the molecular weight are primarily attributable to
           differences in the number of monomer units. A polymer comprises the following:

           (a)   a simple weight majority of molecules containing at least three monomer units which
                 are covalently bound to at least one other monomer unit or other reactant;

           (b)   less than a simple weight majority of molecules of the same molecular weight.

           In the context of this definition a "monomer unit" means the reacted form of a monomer
           substance in a polymer;

6)         Monomer: means a substance which is capable of forming covalent bonds with a sequence
           of additional like or unlike molecules under the conditions of the relevant polymer-forming
           reaction used for the particular process;
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/55


7)       Registrant: means the manufacturer or the importer of a substance or the producer or
         importer of an article submitting a registration for a substance;

8)       Manufacturing: means production or extraction of substances in the natural state;

9)       Manufacturer: means any natural or legal person established within the Community who
         manufactures a substance within the Community;

10)      Import: means the physical introduction into the customs territory of the Community;

11)      Importer: means any natural or legal person established within the Community who is
         responsible for import;

12)      Placing on the market: means supplying or making available, whether in return for
         payment or free of charge, to a third party. Import shall be deemed to be placing on the
         market;

13)      Downstream user: means any natural or legal person established within the Community,
         other than the manufacturer or the importer, who uses a substance, either on its own or in a
         preparation, in the course of his industrial or professional activities. A distributor or a
         consumer is not a downstream user. A re-importer exempted pursuant to Article 2(7)(c)
         shall be regarded as a downstream user;
L 396/56           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


14)        Distributor: means any natural or legal person established within the Community,
           including a retailer, who only stores and places on the market a substance, on its own or in
           a preparation, for third parties;

15)        Intermediate: means a substance that is manufactured for and consumed in or used for
           chemical processing in order to be transformed into another substance (hereinafter referred
           to as "synthesis"):

           (a)   non-isolated intermediate: means an intermediate that during synthesis is not
                 intentionally removed (except for sampling) from the equipment in which the
                 synthesis takes place. Such equipment includes the reaction vessel, its ancillary
                 equipment, and any equipment through which the substance(s) pass(es) during a
                 continuous flow or batch process as well as the pipework for transfer from one vessel
                 to another for the purpose of the next reaction step, but it excludes tanks or other
                 vessels in which the substance(s) are stored after the manufacture;

           (b)   on-site isolated intermediate: means an intermediate not meeting the criteria of a
                 non-isolated intermediate and where the manufacture of the intermediate and the
                 synthesis of (an)other substance(s) from that intermediate take place on the same site,
                 operated by one or more legal entities;

           (c)   transported isolated intermediate: means an intermediate not meeting the criteria of a
                 non-isolated intermediate and transported between or supplied to other sites;
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/57


16)      Site: means a single location, in which, if there is more than one manufacturer
         of (a) substance(s), certain infrastructure and facilities are shared;

17)      Actors in the supply chain: means all manufacturers and/or importers and/or downstream
         users in a supply chain;

18)      Agency: means the European Chemicals Agency as established by this Regulation;

19)      Competent authority: means the authority or authorities or bodies established by the
         Member States to carry out the obligations arising from this Regulation;

20)      Phase-in substance: means a substance which meets at least one of the following criteria:

         (a)   it is listed in the European Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemical
               Substances (EINECS);

         (b)   it was manufactured in the Community, or in the countries acceding to the
               European Union on 1 January 1995 or on 1 May 2004, but not placed on the market
               by the manufacturer or importer, at least once in the 15 years before the entry into
               force of this Regulation, provided the manufacturer or importer has documentary
               evidence of this;
L 396/58          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


           (c)   it was placed on the market in the Community, or in the countries acceding to the
                 European Union on 1 January 1995 or on 1 May 2004, before entry into force of this
                 Regulation by the manufacturer or importer and was considered as having been
                 notified in accordance with the first indent of Article 8(1) of Directive 67/548/EEC
                 but does not meet the definition of a polymer as set out in this Regulation, provided
                 the manufacturer or importer has documentary evidence of this;

21)        Notified substance: means a substance for which a notification has been submitted and
           which could be placed on the market in accordance with Directive 67/548/EEC;

22)        Product and process orientated research and development: means any scientific
           development related to product development or the further development of a substance, on
           its own, in preparations or in articles in the course of which pilot plant or production trials
           are used to develop the production process and/or to test the fields of application of the
           substance;

23)        Scientific research and development: means any scientific experimentation, analysis or
           chemical research carried out under controlled conditions in a volume less than 1 tonne
           per year;

24)        Use: means any processing, formulation, consumption, storage, keeping, treatment, filling
           into containers, transfer from one container to another, mixing, production of an article or
           any other utilisation;
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/59


25)      Registrant's own use: means an industrial or professional use by the registrant;

26)      Identified use: means a use of a substance on its own or in a preparation, or a use of a
         preparation, that is intended by an actor in the supply chain, including his own use, or that
         is made known to him in writing by an immediate downstream user;

27)      Full study report: means a complete and comprehensive description of the activity
         performed to generate the information. This covers the complete scientific paper as
         published in the literature describing the study performed or the full report prepared by the
         test house describing the study performed;

28)      Robust study summary: means a detailed summary of the objectives, methods, results and
         conclusions of a full study report providing sufficient information to make an independent
         assessment of the study minimising the need to consult the full study report;

29)      Study summary: means a summary of the objectives, methods, results and conclusions of a
         full study report providing sufficient information to make an assessment of the relevance
         of the study;

30)      Per year: means per calendar year, unless stated otherwise, for phase-in substances that
         have been imported or manufactured for at least three consecutive years, quantities
         per year shall be calculated on the basis of the average production or import volumes for
         the three preceding calendar years;
L 396/60          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


31)        Restriction: means any condition for or prohibition of the manufacture, use or placing on
           the market;

32)        Supplier of a substance or a preparation: means any manufacturer, importer, downstream
           user or distributor placing on the market a substance, on its own or in a preparation, or a
           preparation;

33)        Supplier of an article: means any producer or importer of an article, distributor or other
           actor in the supply chain placing an article on the market;

34)        Recipient of a substance or a preparation: means a downstream user or a distributor being
           supplied with a substance or a preparation;

35)        Recipient of an article: means an industrial or professional user, or a distributor, being
           supplied with an article but does not include consumers;

36)        SME: means small and medium-sized enterprises as defined in the Commission
           Recommendation of 6 May 2003 concerning the definition of micro, small and
           medium-sized enterprises1;

37)        Exposure scenario: means the set of conditions, including operational conditions and risk
           management measures, that describe how the substance is manufactured or used during its
           life-cycle and how the manufacturer or importer controls, or recommends downstream
           users to control, exposures of humans and the environment. These exposure scenarios may
           cover one specific process or use or several processes or uses as appropriate;




1
       OJ L 124, 20.5.2003, p. 36.
30.12.2006        EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/61


38)      Use and exposure category: means an exposure scenario covering a wide range of
         processes or uses, where the processes or uses are communicated, as a minimum, in terms
         of the brief general description of use;

39)      Substances which occur in nature: means a naturally occurring substance as such,
         unprocessed or processed only by manual, mechanical or gravitational means, by
         dissolution in water, by flotation, by extraction with water, by steam distillation or by
         heating solely to remove water, or which is extracted from air by any means;

40)      Not chemically modified substance: means a substance whose chemical structure remains
         unchanged, even if it has undergone a chemical process or treatment, or a physical
         mineralogical transformation, for instance to remove impurities;

41)      Alloy: means a metallic material, homogenous on a macroscopic scale, consisting of
         two or more elements so combined that they cannot be readily separated by mechanical
         means.


                                                Article 4
                                           General provision

Any manufacturer, importer, or where relevant downstream user, may, whilst retaining full
responsibility for complying with his obligations under this Regulation, appoint a third party
representative for all proceedings under Article 11, Article 19, Title III and Article 53 involving
discussions with other manufacturers, importers, or where relevant downstream users. In these
cases, the identity of a manufacturer or importer or downstream user who has appointed a
representative shall not normally be disclosed by the Agency to other manufacturers, importers, or,
where relevant, downstream users.
L 396/62          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


                                                TITLE II
                             REGISTRATION OF SUBSTANCES


                                              Chapter 1
                            General obligation to register and
                                  information requirements


                                                 Article 5
                                           No data, no market

Subject to Articles 6, 7, 21 and 23, substances on their own, in preparations or in articles shall not
be manufactured in the Community or placed on the market unless they have been registered in
accordance with the relevant provisions of this Title where this is required.


                                                 Article 6
                                General obligation to register substances
                                     on their own or in preparations

1.         Save where this Regulation provides otherwise, any manufacturer or importer of a
           substance, either on its own or in one or more preparation(s), in quantities of 1 tonne or
           more per year shall submit a registration to the Agency.

2.         For monomers that are used as on-site isolated intermediates or transported isolated
           intermediates, Articles 17 and 18 shall not apply.
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/63


3.       Any manufacturer or importer of a polymer shall submit a registration to the Agency for
         the monomer substance(s) or any other substance(s), that have not already been registered
         by an actor up the supply chain, if both the following conditions are met:

         (a)   the polymer consists of 2 % weight by weight (w/w) or more of such monomer
               substance(s) or other substance(s) in the form of monomeric units and chemically
               bound substance(s);

         (b)   the total quantity of such monomer substance(s) or other substance(s) makes up
               1 tonne or more per year.

4.       A submission for registration shall be accompanied by the fee required in accordance with
         Title IX.


                                                 Article 7
                        Registration and notification of substances in articles

1.       Any producer or importer of articles shall submit a registration to the Agency for any
         substance contained in those articles, if both the following conditions are met:

         (a)   the substance is present in those articles in quantities totalling over 1 tonne per
               producer or importer per year;

         (b)   the substance is intended to be released under normal or reasonably foreseeable
               conditions of use.

         A submission for registration shall be accompanied by the fee required in accordance with
         Title IX.
L 396/64           EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


2.         Any producer or importer of articles shall notify the Agency, in accordance with
           paragraph 4 of this Article, if a substance meets the criteria in Article 57 and is identified
           in accordance with Article 59(1), if both the following conditions are met:

           (a)   the substance is present in those articles in quantities totalling over 1 tonne
                 per producer or importer per year;

           (b)   the substance is present in those articles above a concentration of 0,1 % weight by
                 weight (w/w).

3.         Paragraph 2 shall not apply where the producer or importer can exclude exposure to
           humans or the environment during normal or reasonably foreseeable conditions of use
           including disposal. In such cases, the producer or importer shall supply appropriate
           instructions to the recipient of the article.

4.         The information to be notified shall include the following:

           (a)   the identity and contact details of the producer or importer as specified in section 1 of
                 Annex VI, with the exception of their own use sites;

           (b)   the registration number(s) referred to in Article 20(1), if available;

           (c)   the identity of the substance as specified in sections 2.1 to 2.3.4 of Annex VI;

           (d)   the classification of the substance(s) as specified in sections 4.1 and 4.2 of Annex VI;
30.12.2006        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/65


         (e)    a brief description of the use(s) of the substance(s) in the article as specified in
                section 3.5 of Annex VI and of the uses of the article(s);

         (f)    the tonnage range of the substance(s), such as 1-10 tonnes, 10-100 tonnes and so on.

5.       The Agency may take decisions requiring producers or importers of articles to submit a
         registration, in accordance with this Title, for any substance in those articles, if all the
         following conditions are met:

         (a)    the substance is present in those articles in quantities totalling over 1 tonne
                per producer or importer per year;

         (b)    the Agency has grounds for suspecting that:

                (i)    the substance is released from the articles, and

                (ii)   the release of the substance from the articles presents a risk to human health or
                       the environment;

         (c)    the substance is not subject to paragraph 1.

         A submission for registration shall be accompanied by the fee required in accordance with
         Title IX.

6.       Paragraphs 1 to 5 shall not apply to substances that have already been registered for that
         use.
L 396/66          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


7.         From 1 June 2011 paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this Article shall apply 6 months after a
           substance is identified in accordance with Article 59(1).

8.         Any measures for the implementation of paragraphs 1 to 7 shall be adopted in accordance
           with the procedure referred to in Article 133(3).


                                                  Article 8
                         Only representative of a non-Community manufacturer

1.         A natural or legal person established outside the Community who manufactures a
           substance on its own, in preparations or in articles, formulates a preparation or produces an
           article that is imported into the Community may by mutual agreement appoint a natural or
           legal person established in the Community to fulfil, as his only representative, the
           obligations on importers under this Title.

2.         The representative shall also comply with all other obligations of importers under this
           Regulation. To this end, he shall have a sufficient background in the practical handling of
           substances and the information related to them and, without prejudice to Article 36, shall
           keep available and up-to-date information on quantities imported and customers sold to, as
           well as information on the supply of the latest update of the safety data sheet referred to in
           Article 31.

3.         If a representative is appointed in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2, the non-Community
           manufacturer shall inform the importer(s) within the same supply chain of the
           appointment. These importers shall be regarded as downstream users for the purposes of
           this Regulation.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/67



                                                Article 9
                 Exemption from the general obligation to register for product and
                      process orientated research and development (PPORD)

1.       Articles 5, 6, 7, 17, 18 and 21 shall not apply for a period of five years to a substance
         manufactured in the Community or imported for the purposes of product and process
         orientated research and development by a manufacturer or importer or producer of articles,
         by himself or in cooperation with listed customers and in a quantity which is limited to the
         purpose of product and process orientated research and development.

2.       For the purpose of paragraph 1, the manufacturer or importer or producer of articles shall
         notify the Agency of the following information:

         (a)   the identity of the manufacturer or importer or producer of articles as specified in
               section 1 of Annex VI;

         (b)   the identity of the substance, as specified in section 2 of Annex VI;

         (c)   the classification of the substance as specified in section 4 of Annex VI, if any;

         (d)   the estimated quantity as specified in section 3.1 of Annex VI;

         (e)   the list of customers referred to in paragraph 1, including their names and addresses.

         The notification shall be accompanied by the fee required in accordance with Title IX.

         The period set out in paragraph 1 shall begin at receipt of the notification at the Agency.
L 396/68          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


3.         The Agency shall check the completeness of the information supplied by the notifier and
           Article 20(2) shall apply adapted as necessary. The Agency shall assign a number to the
           notification and a notification date, which shall be the date of receipt of the notification at
           the Agency, and shall forthwith communicate that number and date to the manufacturer, or
           importer, or producer of articles concerned. The Agency shall also communicate this
           information to the competent authority of the Member State(s) concerned.

4.         The Agency may decide to impose conditions with the aim of ensuring that the substance
           or the preparation or article in which the substance is incorporated will be handled only by
           staff of listed customers as referred to in paragraph 2(e) in reasonably controlled
           conditions, in accordance with the requirements of legislation for the protection of workers
           and the environment, and will not be made available to the general public at any time
           either on its own or in a preparation or article and that remaining quantities will be
           re-collected for disposal after the exemption period.

           In such cases, the Agency may ask the notifier to provide additional necessary information.

5.         In the absence of any indication to the contrary, the manufacturer or importer of the
           substance or the producer or importer of articles may manufacture or import the substance
           or produce or import the articles not earlier than two weeks after the notification.

6.         The manufacturer or importer or producer of articles shall comply with any conditions
           imposed by the Agency in accordance with paragraph 4.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/69


7.       The Agency may decide to extend the five-year exemption period by a further maximum of
         five years or, in the case of substances to be used exclusively in the development of
         medicinal products for human or veterinary use, or for substances that are not placed on the
         market, for a further maximum of ten years, upon request if the manufacturer or importer
         or producer of articles can demonstrate that such an extension is justified by the research
         and development programme.

8.       The Agency shall forthwith communicate any draft decisions to the competent authorities
         of each Member State in which the manufacture, import, production or product and process
         orientated research takes place.

         When taking decisions as provided for in paragraphs 4 and 7, the Agency shall take into
         account any comments made by such competent authorities.

9.       The Agency and the competent authorities of the Member States concerned shall always
         keep confidential the information submitted in accordance with paragraphs 1 to 8.

10.      An appeal may be brought, in accordance with Articles 91, 92 and 93, against Agency
         decisions under paragraphs 4 and 7 of this Article.
L 396/70           EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006



                                                   Article 10
                        Information to be submitted for general registration purposes

A registration required by Article 6 or by Article 7(1) or (5) shall include all the following
information:

(a)        a technical dossier including:

           (i)    the identity of the manufacturer(s) or importer(s) as specified in section 1 of
                  Annex VI;

           (ii)   the identity of the substance as specified in section 2 of Annex VI;

           (iii) information on the manufacture and use(s) of the substance as specified in section 3
                  of Annex VI; this information shall represent all the registrant's identified use(s).
                  This information may include, if the registrant deems appropriate, the relevant use
                  and exposure categories;

           (iv) the classification and labelling of the substance as specified in section 4 of
                  Annex VI;

           (v)    guidance on safe use of the substance as specified in Section 5 of Annex VI;

           (vi) study summaries of the information derived from the application of Annexes VII
                  to XI;
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/71


         (vii) robust study summaries of the information derived from the application of
               Annexes VII to XI, if required under Annex I;

         (viii) an indication as to which of the information submitted under (iii), (iv), (vi), (vii) or
               subparagraph (b) has been reviewed by an assessor chosen by the manufacturer or
               importer and having appropriate experience;

         (ix) proposals for testing where listed in Annexes IX and X;

         (x)   for substances in quantities of 1 to 10 tonnes, exposure information as specified in
               section 6 of Annex VI;

         (xi) a request as to which of the information in Article 119(2) the manufacturer or
               importer considers should not be made available on the Internet in accordance with
               Article 77(2)(e), including a justification as to why publication could be harmful for
               his or any other concerned party's commercial interests.

         Except in cases covered under Article 25(3), Article 27(6) or Article 30(3), the registrant
         shall be in legitimate possession of or have permission to refer to the full study report
         summarised under (vi) and (vii) for the purpose of registration;

(b)      a chemical safety report when required under Article 14, in the format specified in
         Annex I. The relevant sections of this report may include, if the registrant considers
         appropriate, the relevant use and exposure categories.
L 396/72           EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006



                                                    Article 11
                             Joint submission of data by multiple registrants

1.         When a substance is intended to be manufactured in the Community by one or more
           manufacturers and/or imported by one or more importers, and/or is subject to registration
           under Article 7, the following shall apply.

           Subject to paragraph 3, the information specified in Article 10(a)(iv), (vi), (vii) and (ix),
           and any relevant indication under Article 10(a)(viii) shall first be submitted by the one
           registrant acting with the agreement of the other assenting registrant(s) (hereinafter
           referred to as "the lead registrant").

           Each registrant shall subsequently submit separately the information specified in
           Article 10(a)(i), (ii), (iii) and (x), and any relevant indication under Article 10(a)(viii).

           The registrants may decide themselves whether to submit the information specified in
           Article 10(a)(v) and (b) and any relevant indication under Article 10(a)(viii) separately or
           whether one registrant is to submit this information on behalf of the others.

2.         Each registrant need only comply with paragraph 1 for items of information specified in
           Article 10(a)(iv), (vi), (vii) and (ix) that are required for the purposes of registration within
           his tonnage band in accordance with Article 12.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                           L 396/73


3.       A registrant may submit the information referred to in Article 10(a)(iv), (vi), (vii) or (ix)
         separately if:

         (a)   it would be disproportionately costly for him to submit this information jointly; or

         (b)   submitting the information jointly would lead to disclosure of information which he
               considers to be commercially sensitive and is likely to cause him substantial
               commercial detriment; or

         (c)   he disagrees with the lead registrant on the selection of this information.

         If points (a), (b) or (c) apply, the registrant shall submit, along with the dossier, an
         explanation as to why the costs would be disproportionate, why disclosure of information
         was likely to lead to substantial commercial detriment or the nature of the disagreement, as
         the case may be.

4.       A submission for registration shall be accompanied by the fee required in accordance with
         Title IX.


                                                Article 12
                          Information to be submitted depending on tonnage

1.       The technical dossier referred to in Article 10(a) shall include under points (vi) and (vii) of
         that provision all physicochemical, toxicological and ecotoxicological information that is
         relevant and available to the registrant and as a minimum the following:
L 396/74          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                   30.12.2006


           (a)   the information specified in Annex VII for non-phase-in substances, and for phase-in
                 substances meeting one or both of the criteria specified in Annex III, manufactured
                 or imported in quantities of 1 tonne or more per year per manufacturer or importer;

           (b)   the information on physicochemical properties specified in Annex VII, section 7 for
                 phase-in substances manufactured or imported in quantities of 1 tonne or more
                 per year per manufacturer or importer which do not meet either of the criteria
                 specified in Annex III;

           (c)   the information specified in Annexes VII and VIII for substances manufactured or
                 imported in quantities of 10 tonnes or more per year per manufacturer or importer;

           (d)   the information specified in Annexes VII and VIII and testing proposals for the
                 provision of the information specified in Annex IX for substances manufactured or
                 imported in quantities of 100 tonnes or more per year per manufacturer or importer;

           (e)   the information specified in Annexes VII and VIII and testing proposals for the
                 provision of the information specified in Annexes IX and X for substances
                 manufactured or imported in quantities of 1 000 tonnes or more per year
                 per manufacturer or importer.

2.         As soon as the quantity of a substance per manufacturer or importer that has already been
           registered reaches the next tonnage threshold, the manufacturer or importer shall inform
           the Agency immediately of the additional information he would require under paragraph 1.
           Article 26(3) and (4) shall apply adapted as necessary.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/75


3.       This Article shall apply to producers of articles adapted as necessary.


                                                 Article 13
                        General requirements for generation of information
                                on intrinsic properties of substances

1.       Information on intrinsic properties of substances may be generated by means other than
         tests, provided that the conditions set out in Annex XI are met. In particular for human
         toxicity, information shall be generated whenever possible by means other than vertebrate
         animal tests, through the use of alternative methods, for example, in vitro methods or
         qualitative or quantitative structure-activity relationship models or from information from
         structurally related substances (grouping or read-across). Testing in accordance with
         Annex VIII, section 8.6 and 8.7, Annex IX and Annex X may be omitted where justified
         by information on exposure and implemented risk management measures as specified in
         Annex XI, section 3.

2.       These methods shall be regularly reviewed and improved with a view to reducing testing
         on vertebrate animals and the number of animals involved. The Commission, following
         consultation with relevant stakeholders, shall, as soon as possible, make a proposal, if
         appropriate, to amend the Commission Regulation on test methods adopted in accordance
         with the procedure referred to in Article 133(4), and the Annexes of this Regulation, if
         relevant, so as to replace, reduce or refine animal testing. Amendments to that Commission
         Regulation shall be adopted in accordance with the procedure specified in paragraph 3 and
         amendments to the Annexes of this Regulation shall be adopted in accordance with the
         procedure referred to in Article 131.
L 396/76          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


3.         Where tests on substances are required to generate information on intrinsic properties of
           substances, they shall be conducted in accordance with the test methods laid down in a
           Commission Regulation or in accordance with other international test methods recognised
           by the Commission or the Agency as being appropriate. The Commission shall adopt that
           Regulation, designed to amend the non-essential elements of this Regulation by
           supplementing it, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 133(4).

           Information on intrinsic properties of substances may be generated in accordance with
           other test methods provided that the conditions set out in Annex XI are met.

4.         Ecotoxicological and toxicological tests and analyses shall be carried out in compliance
           with the principles of good laboratory practice provided for in Directive 2004/10/EC or
           other international standards recognised as being equivalent by the Commission or the
           Agency and with the provisions of Directive 86/609/EEC, if applicable.

5.         If a substance has already been registered, a new registrant shall be entitled to refer to the
           study summaries or robust study summaries, for the same substance submitted earlier,
           provided that he can show that the substance that he is now registering is the same as the
           one previously registered, including the degree of purity and the nature of impurities, and
           that the previous registrant(s) have given permission to refer to the full study reports for
           the purpose of registration.

           A new registrant shall not refer to such studies in order to provide the information required
           in section 2 of Annex VI.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/77



                                                Article 14
                              Chemical safety report and duty to apply
                              and recommend risk reduction measures

1.       Without prejudice to Article 4 of Directive 98/24/EC, a chemical safety assessment shall
         be performed and a chemical safety report completed for all substances subject to
         registration in accordance with this Chapter in quantities of 10 tonnes or more per year
         per registrant.

         The chemical safety report shall document the chemical safety assessment which shall be
         conducted in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 7 and with Annex I for either each substance
         on its own or in a preparation or in an article or a group of substances.

2.       A chemical safety assessment in accordance with paragraph 1 need not be performed for a
         substance which is present in a preparation if the concentration of the substance in the
         preparation is less than the lowest of any of the following:

         (a)   the applicable concentrations defined in the table of Article 3(3) of
               Directive 1999/45/EC;

         (b)   the concentration limits given in Annex I to Directive 67/548/EEC;

         (c)   the concentration limits given in Part B of Annex II to Directive 1999/45/EC;
L 396/78          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


           (d)   the concentration limits given in Part B of Annex III to Directive 1999/45/EC;

           (e)   the concentration limits given in an agreed entry in the classification and labelling
                 inventory established under Title XI of this Regulation;

           (f)   0,1 % weight by weight (w/w), if the substance meets the criteria in Annex XIII of
                 this Regulation.

3.         A chemical safety assessment of a substance shall include the following steps:

           (a)   human health hazard assessment;

           (b)   physicochemical hazard assessment;

           (c)   environmental hazard assessment;

           (d)   persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic (PBT) and very persistent and very
                 bioaccumulative (vPvB) assessment.

4.         If, as a result of carrying out steps (a) to (d) of paragraph 3, the registrant concludes that
           the substance meets the criteria for classification as dangerous in accordance with
           Directive 67/548/EEC or is assessed to be a PBT or vPvB, the chemical safety assessment
           shall include the following additional steps:

           (a)   exposure assessment including the generation of exposure scenario(s) (or the
                 identification of relevant use and exposure categories if appropriate) and exposure
                 estimation;
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/79


         (b)   risk characterisation.

         The exposure scenarios (where appropriate the use and exposure categories), exposure
         assessment and risk characterisation shall address all identified uses of the registrant.

5.       The chemical safety report need not include consideration of the risks to human health
         from the following end uses:

         (a)   in food contact materials within the scope of Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 of the
               European Parliament and of the Council of 27 October 2004 on materials and articles
               intended to come into contact with food1;

         (b)   in cosmetic products within the scope of Directive 76/768/EEC.

6.       Any registrant shall identify and apply the appropriate measures to adequately control the
         risks identified in the chemical safety assessment, and where suitable, recommend them in
         the safety data sheets which he supplies in accordance with Article 31.

7.       Any registrant required to conduct a chemical safety assessment shall keep his chemical
         safety report available and up to date.




1
       OJ L 338, 13.11.2004, p. 4.
L 396/80          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


                                               Chapter 2
                        Substances regarded as being registered


                                                  Article 15
                          Substances in plant protection and biocidal products

1.         Active substances and co-formulants manufactured or imported for use in plant protection
           products only and included either in Annex I to Directive 91/414/EEC1 or in
           Regulation (EEC) No 3600/922, Regulation (EC) No 703/20013, Regulation (EC)
           No 1490/20024, Decision 2003/565/EC5 and for any substance for which a Commission
           Decision on the completeness of the dossier has been taken pursuant to Article 6 of
           Directive 91/414/EEC shall be regarded as being registered and the registration as
           completed for manufacture or import for the use as a plant protection product and therefore
           as fulfilling the requirements of Chapters 1 and 5 of this Title.




1
       Council Directive 91/414/EEC of 15 July 1991 concerning the placing of plant protection
       products on the market (OJ L 230, 19.8.1991, p. 1). Directive as last amended by
       Commission Directive 2006/19/EC (OJ L 44, 15.2.2006, p. 15).
2
       Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3600/92 of 11 December 1992 laying down the detailed
       rules for the implementation of the first stage of the programme of work referred to in
       Article 8(2) of Council Directive 91/414/EEC concerning the placing of plant protection
       products on the market (OJ L 366, 15.12.1992, p. 10). Regulation as last amended by
       Commission Regulation (EC) No 2266/2000 (OJ L 259, 13.10.2000, p. 27).
3
       Commission Regulation (EC) No 703/2001 of 6 April 2001 laying down the active
       substances of plant protection products to be assessed in the second stage of the work
       programme referred to in Article 8(2) of Council Directive 91/414/EEC and revising the list
       of Member States designated as rapporteurs for those substances (OJ L 98, 7.4.2001, p. 6).
4
       Commission Regulation (EC) No 1490/2002 of 14 August 2002 laying down further
       detailed rules for the implementation of the third stage of the programme of work referred to
       in Article 8(2) of Council Directive 91/414/EEC (OJ L 224, 21.8.2002, p. 23). Regulation as
       last amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1744/2004 (OJ L 311, 8.10.2004, p. 23).
5
       Commission Decision 2003/565/EC of 25 July 2003 extending the time period provided for
       in Article 8(2) of Council Directive 91/414/EEC (OJ L 192, 31.7.2003, p. 40).
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/81


2.       Active substances manufactured or imported for use in biocidal products only and included
         either in Annexes I, IA or IB to Directive 98/8/EC of the European Parliament and of the
         Council of 16 February 1998 concerning the placing of biocidal products on the market1 or
         in Commission Regulation (EC) No 2032/2003 of 4 November 2003 on the second phase
         of the 10-year work programme referred to in Article 16(2) of Directive 98/8/EC2, until the
         date of the decision referred to in the second subparagraph of Article 16(2) of
         Directive 98/8/EC, shall be regarded as being registered and the registration as completed
         for manufacture or import for the use in a biocidal product and therefore as fulfilling the
         requirements of Chapters 1 and 5 of this Title.


                                                 Article 16
                Duties of the Commission, the Agency and registrants of substances
                                      regarded as being registered

1.       The Commission or the relevant Community body shall make information equivalent to
         that required by Article 10 available to the Agency for substances regarded as registered
         according to Article 15. The Agency shall include this information or a reference thereto in
         its databases and notify the competent authorities thereof by 1 December 2008.

2.       Articles 21, 22 and 25 to 28 shall not apply to uses of substances regarded as registered
         according to Article 15.




1
       OJ L 123, 24.4.1998, p. 1. Directive as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003.
2
       OJ L 307, 24.11.2003, p. 1. Regulation as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1048/2005
       (OJ L 178, 9.7.2005, p. 1).
L 396/82              EN              Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


                                                Chapter 3
                 Obligation to register and information requirements
                           for certain types of isolated intermediates


                                                   Article 17
                                Registration of on-site isolated intermediates

1.         Any manufacturer of an on-site isolated intermediate in quantities of 1 tonne or more
           per year shall submit a registration to the Agency for the on-site isolated intermediate.

2.         A registration for an on-site isolated intermediate shall include all the following
           information, to the extent that the manufacturer is able to submit it without any additional
           testing:

           (a)    the identity of the manufacturer as specified in section 1 of Annex VI;

           (b)    the identity of the intermediate as specified in sections 2.1 to 2.3.4 of Annex VI;

           (c)    the classification of the intermediate as specified in section 4 of Annex VI;

           (d)    any available existing information on physicochemical, human health or
                  environmental properties of the intermediate. Where a full study report is available, a
                  study summary shall be submitted;
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/83


         (e)   a brief general description of the use, as specified in section 3.5 of Annex VI;

         (f)   details of the risk management measures applied.

         Except in cases covered under Article 25(3), Article 27(6) or Article 30(3), the registrant
         shall be in legitimate possession of or have permission to refer to the full study report
         summarised under (d) for the purpose of registration.

         The registration shall be accompanied by the fee required in accordance with Title IX.

3.       Paragraph 2 shall apply only to on-site isolated intermediates if the manufacturer confirms
         that the substance is only manufactured and used under strictly controlled conditions in
         that it is rigorously contained by technical means during its whole lifecycle. Control and
         procedural technologies shall be used to minimise emission and any resulting exposure.

         If these conditions are not fulfilled, the registration shall include the information specified
         in Article 10.


                                                Article 18
                          Registration of transported isolated intermediates

1.       Any manufacturer or importer of a transported isolated intermediate in quantities of
         1 tonne or more per year shall submit a registration to the Agency for the transported
         isolated intermediate.
L 396/84          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


2.         A registration for a transported isolated intermediate shall include all the following
           information:

           (a)   the identity of the manufacturer or importer as specified in section 1 of Annex VI;

           (b)   the identity of the intermediate as specified in sections 2.1 to 2.3.4 of Annex VI;

           (c)   the classification of the intermediate as specified in section 4 of Annex VI;

           (d)   any available existing information on physicochemical, human health or
                 environmental properties of the intermediate. Where a full study report is available, a
                 study summary shall be submitted;

           (e)   a brief general description of the use, as specified in section 3.5 of Annex VI;

           (f)   information on risk management measures applied and recommended to the user in
                 accordance with paragraph 4.

           Except in cases covered under Article 25(3), Article 27(6) or Article 30(3), the registrant
           shall be in legitimate possession of or have permission to refer to the full study report
           summarised under (d) for the purpose of registration.

           The registration shall be accompanied by the fee required in accordance with Title IX.

3.         A registration for a transported isolated intermediate in quantities of more than
           1 000 tonnes per year per manufacturer or importer shall include the information specified
           in Annex VII in addition to the information required under paragraph 2.

           For the generation of this information, Article 13 shall apply.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                          L 396/85


4.       Paragraphs 2 and 3 shall apply only to transported isolated intermediates if the
         manufacturer or importer confirms himself or states that he has received confirmation from
         the user that the synthesis of (an)other substance(s) from that intermediate takes place on
         other sites under the following strictly controlled conditions:

         (a)   the substance is rigorously contained by technical means during its whole lifecycle
               including manufacture, purification, cleaning and maintenance of equipment,
               sampling, analysis, loading and unloading of equipment or vessels, waste disposal or
               purification and storage;

         (b)   procedural and control technologies shall be used that minimise emission and any
               resulting exposure;

         (c)   only properly trained and authorised personnel handle the substance;

         (d)   in the case of cleaning and maintenance works, special procedures such as purging
               and washing are applied before the system is opened and entered;

         (e)   in cases of accident and where waste is generated, procedural and/or control
               technologies are used to minimise emissions and the resulting exposure during
               purification or cleaning and maintenance procedures;

         (f)   substance-handling procedures are well documented and strictly supervised by the
               site operator.

         If the conditions listed in the first subparagraph are not fulfilled, the registration shall
         include the information specified in Article 10.
L 396/86           EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006



                                                    Article 19
                 Joint submission of data on isolated intermediates by multiple registrants

1.         When an on-site isolated intermediate or transported isolated intermediate is intended to be
           manufactured in the Community by one or more manufacturers and/or imported by one or
           more importers, the following shall apply.

           Subject to paragraph 2 of this Article, the information specified in Article 17(2)(c) and (d)
           and Article 18(2)(c) and (d) shall first be submitted by one manufacturer or importer acting
           with the agreement of the other assenting manufacturer(s) or importer(s) (hereinafter
           referred to as "the lead registrant").

           Each registrant shall subsequently submit separately the information specified in
           Article 17(2)(a), (b), (e) and (f) and Article 18(2)(a),(b), (e) and (f).

2.         A manufacturer or importer may submit the information referred to in Article 17(2)(c)
           or (d) and Article 18(2)(c) or (d) separately if:

           (a)    it would be disproportionately costly for him to submit this jointly; or

           (b)    submitting the information jointly would lead to disclosure of information which he
                  considers to be commercially sensitive and is likely to cause him substantial
                  commercial detriment; or
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/87


         (c)   he disagrees with the lead registrant on the selection of this information.

         If points (a), (b) or (c) apply, the manufacturer or importer shall submit, along with the
         dossier, an explanation as to why the costs would be disproportionate, why disclosure of
         information was likely to lead to substantial commercial detriment, or the nature of the
         disagreement, as the case may be.

3.       A submission for registration shall be accompanied by the fee required in accordance with
         Title IX.


                                             Chapter 4
                      Common provisions for all registrations


                                                Article 20
                                          Duties of the Agency

1.       The Agency shall assign a submission number to each registration, which is to be used for
         all correspondence regarding the registration until the registration is deemed to be
         complete, and a submission date, which shall be the date of receipt of the registration at the
         Agency.

2.       The Agency shall undertake a completeness check of each registration in order to ascertain
         that all the elements required under Articles 10 and 12 or under Articles 17 or 18, as well
         as the registration fee referred to in Article 6(4), Article 7(1) and (5), Article 17(2) or
         Article 18(2), have been provided. The completeness check shall not include an assessment
         of the quality or the adequacy of any data or justifications submitted.
L 396/88          EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


           The Agency shall undertake the completeness check within three weeks of the submission
           date, or within three months of the relevant deadline of Article 23, as regards registrations
           of phase-in substances submitted in the course of the two-month period immediately
           preceding that deadline.

           If a registration is incomplete, the Agency shall inform the registrant, before expiry of the
           three-week or three-month period referred to in the second subparagraph, as to what further
           information is required in order for the registration to be complete, while setting a
           reasonable deadline for this. The registrant shall complete his registration and submit it to
           the Agency within the deadline set. The Agency shall confirm the submission date of the
           further information to the registrant. The Agency shall perform a further completeness
           check, considering the further information submitted.

           The Agency shall reject the registration if the registrant fails to complete his registration
           within the deadline set. The registration fee shall not be reimbursed in such cases.

3.         Once the registration is complete, the Agency shall assign a registration number to the
           substance concerned and a registration date, which shall be the same as the submission
           date. The Agency shall without delay communicate the registration number and
           registration date to the registrant concerned. The registration number shall be used for all
           subsequent correspondence regarding registration.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/89


4.       The Agency shall notify the competent authority of the relevant Member State within
         30 days of the submission date, that the following information is available in the Agency
         database:

         (a)   the registration dossier together with the submission or registration number;

         (b)   the submission or registration date;

         (c)   the result of the completeness check; and

         (d)   any request for further information and deadline set in accordance with the
               third subparagraph of paragraph 2.

         The relevant Member State shall be the Member State within which the manufacture takes
         place or the importer is established.

         If the manufacturer has production sites in more than one Member State, the relevant
         Member State shall be the one in which the head office of the manufacturer is established.
         The other Member States where the production sites are established shall also be notified.

         The Agency shall forthwith notify the competent authority of the relevant Member State(s)
         when any further information submitted by the registrant is available on the Agency
         database.
L 396/90          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


5.         An appeal may be brought, in accordance with Articles 91, 92 and 93, against Agency
           decisions under paragraph 2 of this Article.

6.         Where additional information for a particular substance is submitted to the Agency by a
           new registrant, the Agency shall notify the existing registrants that this information is
           available on the database for the purposes of Article 22.


                                                  Article 21
                                Manufacturing and import of substances

1.         A registrant may start or continue the manufacture or import of a substance or production
           or import of an article, if there is no indication to the contrary from the Agency in
           accordance with Article 20(2) within the three weeks after the submission date, without
           prejudice to Article 27(8).

           In the case of registrations of phase-in substances, such a registrant may continue the
           manufacture or import of the substance or production or import of an article, if there is no
           indication to the contrary from the Agency in accordance with Article 20(2) within the
           three weeks after the submission date or, if submitted within the two-month period before
           the relevant deadline of Article 23, if there is no indication to the contrary from the Agency
           in accordance with Article 20(2) within the three months from that deadline, without
           prejudice to Article 27(8).
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/91


         In the case of an update of a registration according to Article 22 a registrant may continue
         the manufacture or import of the substance, or the production or import of the article, if
         there is no indication to the contrary from the Agency in accordance with Article 20(2)
         within the three weeks after the update date, without prejudice to Article 27(8).

2.       If the Agency has informed the registrant that he is to submit further information in
         accordance with the third subparagraph of Article 20(2), the registrant may start the
         manufacture or import of a substance or production or import of an article if there is no
         indication to the contrary from the Agency within the three weeks after receipt by the
         Agency of the further information necessary to complete his registration, without prejudice
         to Article 27(8).

3.       If a lead registrant submits parts of the registration on behalf of one or more other
         registrants, as provided for in Articles 11 or 19, any of the other registrants may
         manufacture or import the substance or produce or import the articles only after the expiry
         of the time-limit laid down in paragraph 1 or 2 of this Article and provided that there is no
         indication to the contrary from the Agency in respect of the registration of the lead
         registrant acting on behalf of the others and his own registration.


                                                Article 22
                                     Further duties of registrants

1.       Following registration, a registrant shall be responsible on his own initiative for updating
         his registration without undue delay with relevant new information and submitting it to the
         Agency in the following cases:
L 396/92          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


           (a)   any change in his status, such as being a manufacturer, an importer or a producer of
                 articles, or in his identity, such as his name or address;

           (b)   any change in the composition of the substance as given in section 2 of Annex VI;

           (c)   changes in the annual or total quantities manufactured or imported by him or in the
                 quantities of substances present in articles produced or imported by him if these
                 result in a change of tonnage band, including cessation of manufacture or import;

           (d)   new identified uses and new uses advised against as in section 3.7 of Annex VI for
                 which the substance is manufactured or imported;

           (e)   new knowledge of the risks of the substance to human health and/or the environment
                 of which he may reasonably be expected to have become aware which leads to
                 changes in the safety data sheet or the chemical safety report;

           (f)   any change in the classification and labelling of the substance;

           (g)   any update or amendment of the chemical safety report or section 5 of Annex VI;

           (h)   the registrant identifies the need to perform a test listed in Annex IX or Annex X, in
                 which cases a testing proposal shall be developed;

           (i)   any change in the access granted to information in the registration.

           The Agency shall communicate this information to the competent authority of the relevant
           Member State.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/93


2.       A registrant shall submit to the Agency an update of the registration containing the
         information required by the decision made in accordance with Articles 40, 41 or 46 or take
         into account a decision made in accordance with Articles 60 and 73, within the deadline
         specified in that decision. The Agency shall notify the competent authority of the relevant
         Member State that the information is available on its database.

3.       The Agency shall undertake a completeness check according to Article 20(2) first and
         second subparagraphs of each updated registration. In cases where the update is in
         accordance with Article 12(2) and with paragraph 1(c) of this Article then the Agency shall
         check the completeness of the information supplied by the registrant and Article 20(2)
         shall apply adapted as necessary.

4.       In cases covered by Articles 11 or 19, each registrant shall submit separately the
         information specified in paragraph 1(c) of this Article.

5.       An update shall be accompanied by the relevant part of the fee required in accordance with
         Title IX.
L 396/94          EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


                                                Chapter 5
                           Transitional provisions applicable to
                       phase-in substances and notified substances


                                                   Article 23
                               Specific provisions for phase-in substances

1.         Article 5, Article 6, Article 7(1), Article 17, Article 18 and Article 21 shall not apply
           until 1 December 2010 to the following substances:

           (a)   phase-in substances classified as carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic to reproduction,
                 category 1 or 2, in accordance with Directive 67/548/EEC and manufactured in the
                 Community or imported, in quantities reaching 1 tonne or more per year
                 per manufacturer or per importer, at least once after 1 June 2007;

           (b)   phase-in substances classified as very toxic to aquatic organisms which may cause
                 long-term adverse effects in the aquatic environment (R50/53) in accordance with
                 Directive 67/548/EEC, and manufactured in the Community or imported in quantities
                 reaching 100 tonnes or more per year per manufacturer or per importer, at least once
                 after 1 June 2007;

           (c)   phase-in substances manufactured in the Community or imported, in quantities
                 reaching 1 000 tonnes or more per year per manufacturer or per importer, at least
                 once after 1 June 2007.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/95


2.       Article 5, Article 6, Article 7(1), Article 17, Article 18 and Article 21 shall not apply
         until 1 June 2013 to phase-in substances manufactured in the Community or imported, in
         quantities reaching 100 tonnes or more per year per manufacturer or per importer, at least
         once after 1 June 2007.

3.       Article 5, Article 6, Article 7(1), Article 17, Article 18 and Article 21 shall not apply
         until 1 June 2018 to phase-in substances manufactured in the Community or imported, in
         quantities reaching 1 tonne or more per year per manufacturer or per importer, at least
         once after 1 June 2007.

4.       Without prejudice to paragraphs 1 to 3, a registration can be submitted at any time before
         the relevant deadline.

5.       This Article shall also apply to substances registered under Article 7 adapted as necessary.


                                                Article 24
                                          Notified substances

1.       A notification in accordance with Directive 67/548/EEC shall be regarded as a registration
         for the purposes of this Title and the Agency shall assign a registration number by 1
         December 2008.

2.       If the quantity of a notified substance manufactured or imported per manufacturer or
         importer reaches the next tonnage threshold under Article 12, the additional required
         information corresponding to that tonnage threshold, as well as to all the lower tonnage
         thresholds, shall be submitted in accordance with Articles 10 and 12, unless it has already
         been submitted in accordance with those Articles.
L 396/96          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


                                                  TITLE III
                                       DATA SHARING AND
                       AVOIDANCE OF UNNECESSARY TESTING


                                                  Chapter 1
                                 Objectives and general rules


                                                   Article 25
                                       Objectives and general rules

1.         In order to avoid animal testing, testing on vertebrate animals for the purposes of this
           Regulation shall be undertaken only as a last resort. It is also necessary to take measures
           limiting duplication of other tests.

2.         The sharing and joint submission of information in accordance with this Regulation shall
           concern technical data and in particular information related to the intrinsic properties of
           substances. Registrants shall refrain from exchanging information concerning their market
           behaviour, in particular as regards production capacities, production or sales volumes,
           import volumes or market shares.

3.         Any study summaries or robust study summaries of studies submitted in the framework of
           a registration under this Regulation at least 12 years previously can be used for the
           purposes of registration by another manufacturer or importer.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/97


                                             Chapter 2
               Rules for non-phase-in substances and registrants of
                 phase-in substances who have not pre-registered


                                                Article 26
                                  Duty to inquire prior to registration

1.       Every potential registrant of a non-phase-in substance, or potential registrant of a phase-in
         substance who has not pre-registered in accordance with Article 28, shall inquire from the
         Agency whether a registration has already been submitted for the same substance. He shall
         submit all the following information to the Agency with the inquiry:

         (a)    his identity as specified in section 1 of Annex VI, with the exception of the use sites;

         (b)    the identity of the substance, as specified in section 2 of Annex VI;

         (c)    which information requirements would require new studies involving vertebrate
                animals to be carried out by him;

         (d)    which information requirements would require other new studies to be carried out by
                him.

2.       If the same substance has previously not been registered, the Agency shall inform the
         potential registrant accordingly.
L 396/98           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


3.         If the same substance has previously been registered less than 12 years earlier, the Agency
           shall inform the potential registrant without delay of the names and addresses of the
           previous registrant(s) and of the relevant summaries or robust study summaries, as the case
           may be, already submitted by them.

           Studies involving vertebrate animals shall not be repeated.

           The Agency shall simultaneously inform the previous registrants of the name and address
           of the potential registrant. The available studies shall be shared with the potential registrant
           in accordance with Article 27.

4.         If several potential registrants have made an inquiry in respect of the same substance, the
           Agency shall inform all potential registrants without delay of the name and address of the
           other potential registrants.


                                                  Article 27
                        Sharing of existing data in the case of registered substances

1.         Where a substance has previously been registered less than 12 years earlier as referred to in
           Article 26(3), the potential registrant:

           (a)   shall, in the case of information involving tests on vertebrate animals; and

           (b)   may, in the case of information not involving tests on vertebrate animals,

           request from the previous registrant(s) the information he requires with respect to
           Article 10(a)(vi) and (vii) in order to register.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/99


2.       When a request for information has been made according to paragraph 1, the potential and
         the previous registrant(s) as referred to in paragraph 1 shall make every effort to reach an
         agreement on the sharing of the information requested by the potential registrant(s) with
         respect to Article 10(a)(vi) and (vii). Such an agreement may be replaced by submission of
         the matter to an arbitration board and acceptance of the arbitration order.

3.       The previous registrant and potential registrant(s) shall make every effort to ensure that the
         costs of sharing the information are determined in a fair, transparent and
         non-discriminatory way. This may be facilitated by following cost sharing guidance based
         on those principles which is adopted by the Agency in accordance with Article 77(2)(g).
         Registrants are only required to share in the costs of information that they are required to
         submit to satisfy their registration requirements.

4.       On agreement on the sharing of the information, the previous registrant shall make
         available to the new registrant the agreed information and shall give the new registrant the
         permission to refer to the previous registrant's full study report.

5.       If there is failure to reach such an agreement, the potential registrant(s) shall inform the
         Agency and the previous registrant(s) thereof at the earliest one month after receipt, from
         the Agency, of the name and address of the previous registrant(s).
L 396/100          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


6.          Within one month from the receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 5, the
            Agency shall give the potential registrant permission to refer to the information requested
            by him in his registration dossier, subject to the potential registrant providing, upon request
            by the Agency, proof that he has paid the previous registrant(s) for that information a share
            of cost incurred. The previous registrant(s) shall have a claim on the potential registrant for
            a proportionate share of the cost incurred by him. Calculation of the proportionate share
            may be facilitated by the guidance adopted by the Agency in accordance with
            Article 77(2)(g). Provided he makes the full study report available to the potential
            registrant, the previous registrant(s) shall have a claim on the potential registrant for an
            equal share of the cost incurred by him, which shall be enforceable in the national courts.

7.          An appeal may be brought, in accordance with Articles 91, 92 and 93, against Agency
            decisions under paragraph 6 of this Article.

8.          The registration waiting period in accordance with Article 21(1) for the new registrant
            shall be extended by a period of four months, if the previous registrant so requests.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/101


                                            Chapter 3
                             Rules for phase-in-substances


                                               Article 28
                            Duty to pre-register for phase-in substances

1.       In order to benefit from the transitional regime provided for in Article 23 each potential
         registrant of a phase-in substance in quantities of 1 tonne or more per year, including
         without limitation intermediates, shall submit all the following information to the Agency:

         (a)   the name of the substance as specified in section 2 of Annex VI, including its
               EINECS and CAS number or, if not available, any other identity codes;

         (b)   his name and address and the name of the contact person and, where appropriate, the
               name and address of the person representing him in accordance with Article 4 as
               specified in section 1 of Annex VI;

         (c)   the envisaged deadline for the registration and the tonnage band;

         (d)   the name(s) of substance(s) as specified in section 2 of Annex VI, including their
               EINECS and CAS number or, if not available, any other identity codes, for which the
               available information is relevant for the application of sections 1.3 and 1.5 of
               Annex XI.
L 396/102          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


2.          The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall be submitted within a time period starting
            on 1 June 2008 and ending on 1 December 2008.

3.          Registrants who do not submit the information required under paragraph 1 shall not be able
            to rely on Article 23.

4.          The Agency shall by 1 January 2009 publish on its website a list of the substances referred
            to in paragraph 1(a) and (d). That list shall comprise only the names of the substances,
            including their EINECS and CAS number if available and other identity codes, and the
            first envisaged registration deadline.

5.          After the publication of the list a downstream user of a substance not appearing on the list
            may notify the Agency of his interest in the substance, his contact details and the details of
            his current supplier. The Agency shall publish on its website the name of the substance and
            on request provide contact details of the downstream user to a potential registrant.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/103


6.       Potential registrants who manufacture or import for the first time a phase-in substance in
         quantities of 1 tonne or more per year or use for the first time a phase-in substance in the
         context of production of articles or import for the first time an article containing a phase-in
         substance that would require registration, after 1 December 2008, shall be entitled to rely
         on Article 23 provided that they submit the information referred to in paragraph 1 of this
         Article to the Agency within six months of first manufacturing, importing or using the
         substance in quantities of 1 tonne or more per year and no later than 12 months before the
         relevant deadline in Article 23.

7.       Manufacturers or importers of phase-in substances in quantities of less than 1 tonne
         per year that appear on the list published by the Agency in accordance with paragraph 4 of
         this Article, as well as downstream users of those substances and third parties holding
         information on those substances, may submit the information referred to in paragraph 1 of
         this Article or any other relevant information to the Agency for those substances, with the
         intention of being part of the substance information exchange forum as referred to in
         Article 29.
L 396/104          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006



                                                  Article 29
                                  Substance Information Exchange Fora

1.          All potential registrants, downstream users and third parties who have submitted
            information to the Agency in accordance with Article 28, or whose information is held by
            the Agency in accordance with Article 15, for the same phase-in substance, or registrants
            who have submitted a registration for that phase-in substance before the deadline set out in
            Article 23(3), shall be participants in a substance information exchange forum (SIEF).

2.          The aim of each SIEF shall be to:

            (a)   facilitate, for the purposes of registration, the exchange of the information specified
                  in Article 10(a) (vi) and (vii) between potential registrants, thereby avoiding the
                  duplication of studies; and

            (b)   agree classification and labelling where there is a difference in the classification and
                  labelling of the substance between potential registrants.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/105


3.       SIEF participants shall provide other participants with existing studies, react to requests by
         other participants for information, collectively identify needs for further studies for the
         purposes of paragraph 2(a) and arrange for such studies to be carried out. Each SIEF shall
         be operational until 1 June 2018.


                                                Article 30
                                    Sharing of data involving tests

1.       Before testing is carried out in order to meet the information requirements for the purposes
         of registration, a SIEF participant shall inquire whether a relevant study is available by
         communicating within his SIEF. If a relevant study involving tests on vertebrate animals is
         available within the SIEF, a participant of that SIEF shall request that study. If a relevant
         study not involving tests on vertebrate animals is available within the SIEF, a SIEF
         participant may request that study.

         Within one month of the request, the owner of the study shall provide proof of its cost to
         the participant(s) requesting it. The participant(s) and the owner shall make every effort to
         ensure that the costs of sharing the information are determined in a fair, transparent and
         non discriminatory way. This may be facilitated by following any cost sharing guidance
         which is based on those principles and is adopted by the Agency in accordance with
         Article 77(2)(g). If they cannot reach such an agreement, the cost shall be shared equally.
         The owner shall give permission to refer to the full study report for the purpose of
         registration within two weeks of receipt of payment. Registrants are only required to share
         in the costs of information that they are required to submit to satisfy their registration
         requirements.
L 396/106          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


2.          If a relevant study involving tests is not available within the SIEF, only one study shall be
            conducted per information requirement within each SIEF by one of its participants acting
            on behalf of the others. They shall take all reasonable steps to reach an agreement within a
            deadline set by the Agency as to who is to carry out the test on behalf of the other
            participants and to submit a summary or robust study summary to the Agency. If no
            agreement is reached, the Agency shall specify which registrant or downstream user shall
            perform the test. All participants of the SIEF who require a study shall contribute to the
            costs for the elaboration of the study with a share corresponding to the number of
            participating potential registrants. Those participants that do not carry out the study
            themselves shall have the right to receive the full study report within two weeks following
            payment to the participant that carried out the study.

3.          If the owner of a study as referred to in paragraph 1 which involves testing on vertebrate
            animals refuses to provide either proof of the cost of that study or the study itself to
            (an)other participant(s), he shall not be able to proceed with registration until he provides
            the information to the other participants(s). The other participant(s) shall proceed with
            registration without fulfilling the relevant information requirement, explaining the reason
            for this in the registration dossier. The study shall not be repeated unless within 12 months
            of the date of registration of the other participant(s), the owner of this information has not
            provided it to them and the Agency decides that the test should be repeated by them.
            However, if a registration containing this information has already been submitted by
            another registrant, the Agency shall give the other participant(s) permission to refer to the
            information in his registration dossier(s). The other registrant shall have a claim on the
            other participant(s) for an equal share of the cost, provided he makes the full study report
            available to the other participant(s), which shall be enforceable in the national courts.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/107


4.       If the owner of a study as referred to in paragraph 1 which does not involve testing on
         vertebrate animals refuses to provide either proof of the cost of that study or the study itself
         to (an)other participant(s), the other SIEF participants shall proceed with registration as if
         no relevant study was available in the SIEF.

5.       An appeal may be brought, in accordance with Articles 91, 92 and 93, against Agency
         decisions under paragraphs 2 or 3 of this Article.

6.       The owner of the study who has refused to provide either proof of the cost or the study
         itself, as referred to in paragraph 3 or 4 of this Article, shall be penalised in accordance
         with Article 126.

                                              TITLE IV
                                         INFORMATION
                                   IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN



                                                Article 31
                                 Requirements for Safety Data Sheets

1.       The supplier of a substance or a preparation shall provide the recipient of the substance or
         preparation with a safety data sheet compiled in accordance with Annex II:

         (a)   where a substance or preparation meets the criteria for classification as dangerous in
               accordance with Directives 67/548/EEC or 1999/45/EC; or

         (b)   where a substance is persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic or very persistent and very
               bioaccumulative in accordance with the criteria set out in Annex XIII; or

         (c)   where a substance is included in the list established in accordance with Article 59(1)
               for reasons other than those referred to in points (a) and (b).
L 396/108          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


2.          Any actor in the supply chain who is required, under Articles 14 or 37, to carry out a
            chemical safety assessment for a substance shall ensure that the information in the safety
            data sheet is consistent with the information in this assessment. If the safety data sheet is
            developed for a preparation and the actor in the supply chain has prepared a chemical
            safety assessment for that preparation, it is sufficient if the information in the safety data
            sheet is consistent with the chemical safety report for the preparation instead of with the
            chemical safety report for each substance in the preparation.

3.          The supplier shall provide the recipient at his request with a safety data sheet compiled in
            accordance with Annex II, where a preparation does not meet the criteria for classification
            as dangerous in accordance with Articles 5, 6 and 7 of Directive 1999/45/EC, but contains:

            (a)   in an individual concentration of ≥ 1 % by weight for non-gaseous preparations and
                  ≥ 0,2 % by volume for gaseous preparations at least one substance posing human
                  health or environmental hazards; or

            (b)   in an individual concentration of ≥ 0,1 % by weight for non-gaseous preparations at
                  least one substance that is persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic or very persistent
                  and very bioaccumulative in accordance with the criteria set out in Annex XIII or has
                  been included for reasons other than those referred to in point (a) in the list
                  established in accordance with Article 59(1);or

            (c)   a substance for which there are Community workplace exposure limits.
30.12.2006      EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/109


4.       The safety data sheet need not be supplied where dangerous substances or preparations
         offered or sold to the general public are provided with sufficient information to enable
         users to take the necessary measures as regards the protection of human health, safety and
         the environment, unless requested by a downstream user or distributor.

5.       The safety data sheet shall be supplied in an official language of the Member State(s)
         where the substance or preparation is placed on the market, unless the Member State(s)
         concerned provide otherwise.

6.       The safety data sheet shall be dated and shall contain the following headings:

         1.    identification of the substance/preparation and of the company/undertaking;

         2.    hazards identification;

         3.    composition/information on ingredients;

         4.    first-aid measures;

         5.    fire-fighting measures;

         6.    accidental release measures;

         7.    handling and storage;

         8.    exposure controls/personal protection;

         9.    physical and chemical properties;

         10.   stability and reactivity;

         11.   toxicological information;
L 396/110          EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                   30.12.2006


            12.   ecological information;

            13.   disposal considerations;

            14.   transport information;

            15.   regulatory information;

            16.   other information.

7.          Any actor in the supply chain who is required to prepare a chemical safety report according
            to Articles 14 or 37 shall place the relevant exposure scenarios (including use and exposure
            categories where appropriate) in an annex to the safety data sheet covering identified uses
            and including specific conditions resulting from the application of section 3 of Annex XI.

            Any downstream user shall include relevant exposure scenarios, and use other relevant
            information, from the safety data sheet supplied to him when compiling his own safety
            data sheet for identified uses.

            Any distributor shall pass on relevant exposure scenarios, and use other relevant
            information, from the safety data sheet supplied to him when compiling his own safety
            data sheet for uses for which he has passed on information according to Article 37(2).

8.          A safety data sheet shall be provided free of charge on paper or electronically.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/111


9.       Suppliers shall update the safety data sheet without delay on the following occasions:

         (a)   as soon as new information which may affect the risk management measures, or new
               information on hazards becomes available;

         (b)   once an authorisation has been granted or refused;

         (c)   once a restriction has been imposed.

         The new, dated version of the information, identified as "Revision: (date)", shall be
         provided free of charge on paper or electronically to all former recipients to whom they
         have supplied the substance or preparation within the preceding 12 months. Any updates
         following registration shall include the registration number.


                                               Article 32
                      Duty to communicate information down the supply chain
                           for substances on their own or in preparations
                            for which a safety data sheet is not required

1.       Any supplier of a substance on its own or in a preparation who does not have to supply a
         safety data sheet in accordance with Article 31 shall provide the recipient with the
         following information:

         (a)   the registration number(s) referred to in Article 20(3), if available, for any substances
               for which information is communicated under points (b), (c) or (d) of this paragraph

         (b)   if the substance is subject to authorisation and details of any authorisation granted or
               denied under Title VII in this supply chain;

         (c)   details of any restriction imposed under Title VIII;
L 396/112           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            (d)   any other available and relevant information about the substance that is necessary to
                  enable appropriate risk management measures to be identified and applied including
                  specific conditions resulting from the application of section 3 of Annex XI.

2.          The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall be communicated free of charge on paper
            or electronically at the latest at the time of the first delivery of a substance on its own or in
            a preparation after 1 June 2007.

3.          Suppliers shall update this information without delay on the following occasions:

            (a)   as soon as new information which may affect the risk management measures, or new
                  information on hazards becomes available;

            (b)   once an authorisation has been granted or refused;

            (c)   once a restriction has been imposed.

            In addition, the updated information shall be provided free of charge on paper or
            electronically to all former recipients to whom they have supplied the substance or
            preparation within the preceding 12 months. Any updates following registration shall
            include the registration number.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/113



                                                Article 33
                      Duty to communicate information on substances in articles

1.       Any supplier of an article containing a substance meeting the criteria in Article 57 and
         identified in accordance with Article 59(1) in a concentration above 0,1 % weight by
         weight (w/w) shall provide the recipient of the article with sufficient information, available
         to the supplier, to allow safe use of the article including, as a minimum, the name of that
         substance.

2.       On request by a consumer any supplier of an article containing a substance meeting the
         criteria in Article 57 and identified in accordance with Article 59(1) in a concentration
         above 0,1 % weight by weight (w/w) shall provide the consumer with sufficient
         information, available to the supplier, to allow safe use of the article including, as a
         minimum, the name of that substance.

         The relevant information shall be provided, free of charge, within 45 days of receipt of the
         request.


                                                Article 34
                                 Duty to communicate information on
                          substances and preparations up the supply chain

Any actor in the supply chain of a substance or a preparation shall communicate the following
information to the next actor or distributor up the supply chain:

(a)      new information on hazardous properties, regardless of the uses concerned;
L 396/114          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


(b)         any other information that might call into question the appropriateness of the risk
            management measures identified in a safety data sheet supplied to him, which shall be
            communicated only for identified uses.

Distributors shall pass on that information to the next actor or distributor up the supply chain.


                                                   Article 35
                                     Access to information for workers

Workers and their representatives shall be granted access by their employer to the information
provided in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 in relation to substances or preparations that they
use or may be exposed to in the course of their work.


                                                   Article 36
                                       Obligation to keep information

1.          Each manufacturer, importer, downstream user and distributor shall assemble and keep
            available all the information he requires to carry out his duties under this Regulation for a
            period of at least 10 years after he last manufactured, imported, supplied or used the
            substance or preparation. That manufacturer, importer, downstream user or distributor shall
            submit this information or make it available without delay upon request to any competent
            authority of the Member State in which he is established or to the Agency, without
            prejudice to Titles II and VI.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/115


2.       In the event of a registrant, downstream user or distributor ceasing activity, or transferring
         part or all of his operations to a third party, the party responsible for liquidating the
         registrant, downstream user or distributor's undertaking or assuming responsibility for the
         placing on the market of the substance or preparation concerned shall be bound by the
         obligation in paragraph 1 in place of the registrant, downstream user or distributor.

                                               TITLE V
                                    DOWNSTREAM USERS



                                                Article 37
                          Downstream user chemical safety assessments and
                   duty to identify, apply and recommend risk reduction measures

1.       A downstream user or distributor may provide information to assist in the preparation of a
         registration.

2.       Any downstream user shall have the right to make a use, as a minimum the brief general
         description of use, known in writing (on paper or electronically) to the manufacturer,
         importer, downstream user or distributor who supplies him with a substance on its own or
         in a preparation with the aim of making this an identified use. In making a use known, he
         shall provide sufficient information to allow the manufacturer, importer or downstream
         user who has supplied the substance, to prepare an exposure scenario, or if appropriate a
         use and exposure category, for his use in the manufacturer, importer or downstream user's
         chemical safety assessment.

         Distributors shall pass on such information to the next actor or distributor up the supply
         chain. Downstream users in receipt of such information may prepare an exposure scenario
         for the identified use(s), or pass the information to the next actor up the supply chain.
L 396/116          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


3.          For registered substances, the manufacturer, importer or downstream user shall comply
            with the obligations laid down in Article 14 either before he next supplies the substance on
            its own or in a preparation to the downstream user making the request referred to in
            paragraph 2 of this Article, provided that the request was made at least one month before
            the supply, or within one month after the request, whichever is the later.

            For phase-in substances, the manufacturer, importer or downstream user shall comply with
            this request and with the obligations laid down in Article 14 before the relevant deadline in
            Article 23 has expired, provided that the downstream user makes his request at least
            12 months before the deadline in question.

            Where the manufacturer, importer or downstream user, having assessed the use in
            accordance with Article 14, is unable to include it as an identified use for reasons of
            protection of human health or the environment, he shall provide the Agency and the
            downstream user with the reason(s) for that decision in writing without delay and shall not
            supply downstream user(s) with the substance without including these reason(s) in the
            information referred to under Articles 31 or 32. The manufacturer or importer shall include
            this use in section 3.7 of Annex VI in his update of the registration in accordance with
            Article 22(1)(d).

4.          A downstream user of a substance on its own or in a preparation shall prepare a chemical
            safety report in accordance with Annex XII for any use outside the conditions described in
            an exposure scenario or if appropriate a use and exposure category communicated to him
            in a safety data sheet or for any use his supplier advises against.
30.12.2006        EN               Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/117


         A downstream user need not prepare such a chemical safety report in any of the following
         cases:

         (a)   a safety data sheet is not required to be communicated with the substance or
               preparation in accordance with Article 31;

         (b)   a chemical safety report is not required to be completed by his supplier in accordance
               with Article 14;

         (c)   the downstream user uses the substance or preparation in a total quantity of less than
               1 tonne per year;

         (d)   the downstream user implements or recommends an exposure scenario which
               includes as a minimum the conditions described in the exposure scenario
               communicated to him in the safety data sheet;

         (e)   the substance is present in a preparation in a concentration lower than any of the
               concentrations set out in Article 14(2);

         (f)   the downstream user is using the substance for the purposes of product and process
               oriented research and development, provided that the risks to human health and the
               environment are adequately controlled in accordance with the requirements of
               legislation for the protection of workers and the environment.
L 396/118          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


5.          Any downstream user shall identify, apply and where suitable, recommend, appropriate
            measures to adequately control risks identified in any of the following:

            (a)   the safety data sheet(s) supplied to him;

            (b)   his own chemical safety assessment;

            (c)   any information on risk management measures supplied to him in accordance with
                  Article 32.

6.          Where a downstream user does not prepare a chemical safety report in accordance with
            paragraph 4(c), he shall consider the use(s) of the substance and identify and apply any
            appropriate risk management measures needed to ensure that the risks to human health and
            the environment are adequately controlled. Where necessary, this information shall be
            included in any safety data sheet prepared by him.

7.          Downstream users shall keep their chemical safety report up to date and available.

8.          A chemical safety report prepared in accordance with paragraph 4 of this Article need
            not include consideration of the risks to human health from the end uses set out in
            Article 14(5).
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/119



                                                Article 38
                       Obligation for downstream users to report information

1.       Before commencing or continuing with a particular use of a substance that has been
         registered by an actor up the supply chain in accordance with Articles 6 or 18, the
         downstream user shall report to the Agency the information specified in paragraph 2 of this
         Article, in the following cases:

         (a)   the downstream user has to prepare a chemical safety report in accordance with
               Article 37(4); or

         (b)   the downstream user is relying on the exemptions in Article 37(4)(c) or (f).

2.       The information reported by the downstream user shall include the following:

         (a)   his identity and contact details as specified in section 1.1 of Annex VI;

         (b)   the registration number(s) referred to in Article 20(3), if available;

         (c)   the identity of the substance(s) as specified in section 2.1 to 2.3.4 of Annex VI;

         (d)   the identity of the manufacturer(s) or the importer(s) or other supplier as specified in
               section 1.1 of Annex VI;
L 396/120           EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                   30.12.2006


            (e)   a brief general description of the use(s), as specified in section 3.5 of Annex VI, and
                  of the conditions of use(s);

            (f)   except where the downstream user is relying on the exemption in Article 37(4)(c), a
                  proposal for additional testing on vertebrate animals, where this is considered
                  necessary by the downstream user to complete his chemical safety assessment.

3.          The downstream user shall update this information without delay in the event of a change
            in the information reported in accordance with paragraph 1.

4.          A downstream user shall report to the Agency if his classification of a substance is
            different to that of his supplier.

5.          Except where a downstream user is relying on the exemption in Article 37(4)(c), reporting
            in accordance with paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article shall not be required in respect of a
            substance, on its own or in a preparation, used by the downstream user in quantities of less
            than 1 tonne per year for that particular use.


                                                    Article 39
                                 Application of downstream user obligations

1.          Downstream users shall be required to comply with the requirements of Article 37 at the
            latest 12 months after receiving a registration number communicated to them by their
            suppliers in a safety data sheet.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/121


2.       Downstream users shall be required to comply with the requirements of Article 38 at the
         latest six months after receiving a registration number communicated to them by their
         suppliers in a safety data sheet.

                                              TITLE VI
                                             EVALUATION


                                              Chapter 1
                                      Dossier evaluation


                                                Article 40
                                   Examination of testing proposals

1.       The Agency shall examine any testing proposal set out in a registration or a downstream
         user report for provision of the information specified in Annexes IX and X for a substance.
         Priority shall be given to registrations of substances which have or may have PBT, vPvB,
         sensitising and/or carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic for reproduction (CMR) properties, or
         substances classified as dangerous according to Directive 67/548/EEC above 100 tonnes
         per year with uses resulting in widespread and diffuse exposure.
L 396/122          EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


2.          Information relating to testing proposals involving tests on vertebrate animals shall be
            published on the Agency website. The Agency shall publish on its website the name of the
            substance, the hazard end-point for which vertebrate testing is proposed, and the date by
            which any third party information is required. It shall invite third parties to submit, using
            the format provided by the Agency, scientifically valid information and studies that
            address the relevant substance and hazard end-point, addressed by the testing proposal,
            within 45 days of the date of publication. All such scientifically valid information and
            studies received shall be taken into account by the Agency in preparing its decision in
            accordance with paragraph 3.

3.          On the basis of the examination under paragraph 1, the Agency shall draft one of the
            following decisions and that decision shall be taken in accordance with the procedure laid
            down in Articles 50 and 51:

            (a)   a decision requiring the registrant(s) or downstream user(s) concerned to carry out
                  the proposed test and setting a deadline for submission of the study summary, or the
                  robust study summary if required by Annex I;

            (b)   a decision in accordance with point (a), but modifying the conditions under which
                  the test is to be carried out;

            (c)   a decision in accordance with points (a), (b) or (d) but requiring registrant(s) or
                  downstream user(s) to carry out one or more additional tests in cases of
                  non-compliance of the testing proposal with Annexes IX, X and XI;

            (d)   a decision rejecting the testing proposal;
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/123


         (e)   a decision in accordance with points (a), (b) or (c), if several registrants or
               downstream users of the same substance have submitted proposals for the same test,
               giving them the opportunity to reach an agreement on who will perform the test on
               behalf of all of them and to inform the Agency accordingly within 90 days. If the
               Agency is not informed of such agreement within such 90 days, it shall designate
               one of the registrants or downstream users, as appropriate, to perform the test on
               behalf of all of them.

4.       The registrant or downstream user shall submit the information required to the Agency by
         the deadline set.


                                                Article 41
                                  Compliance check of registrations

1.       The Agency may examine any registration in order to verify any of the following:

         (a)   that the information in the technical dossier(s) submitted pursuant to Article 10
               complies with the requirements of Articles 10, 12 and 13 and with Annexes III and
               VI to X;

         (b)   that the adaptations of the standard information requirements and the related
               justifications submitted in the technical dossier(s) comply with the rules governing
               such adaptations set out in Annexes VII to X and with the general rules set out in
               Annex XI;
L 396/124          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                   30.12.2006


            (c)   that any required chemical safety assessment and chemical safety report comply with
                  the requirements of Annex I and that the proposed risk management measures are
                  adequate;

            (d)   that any explanation(s) submitted in accordance with Article 11(3) or Article 19(2)
                  have an objective basis.

2.          The list of dossiers being checked for compliance by the Agency shall be made available to
            Member States competent authorities.

3.          On the basis of an examination made pursuant to paragraph 1, the Agency may, within
            12 months of the start of the compliance check, prepare a draft decision requiring the
            registrant(s) to submit any information needed to bring the registration(s) into compliance
            with the relevant information requirements and specifying adequate time limits for the
            submission of further information. Such a decision shall be taken in accordance with the
            procedure laid down in Articles 50 and 51.

4.          The registrant shall submit the information required to the Agency by the deadline set.

5.          To ensure that registration dossiers comply with this Regulation, the Agency shall select a
            percentage of those dossiers, no lower than 5 % of the total received by the Agency for
            each tonnage band, for compliance checking. The Agency shall give priority, but not
            exclusively, to dossiers meeting at least one of the following criteria:
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/125


         (a)   the dossier contains information in Article 10(a)(iv), (vi) and/or (vii) submitted
               separately as per Article 11(3); or

         (b)   the dossier is for a substance manufactured or imported in quantities of 1 tonne or
               more per year and does not meet the requirements of Annex VII applying under
               either Article 12(1)(a) or (b), as the case may be; or

         (c)   the dossier is for a substance listed in the Community rolling action plan referred to
               in Article 44(2).

6.       Any third party may electronically submit information to the Agency relating to substances
         that appear on the list referred to in Article 28(4). The Agency shall consider this
         information together with the information submitted according to Article 124 when
         checking and selecting dossiers.

7.       The Commission may, after consulting with the Agency, take a decision to vary the
         percentage of dossiers selected and amend or include further criteria in paragraph 5 in
         accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 133(4)


                                                Article 42
                Check of information submitted and follow-up to dossier evaluation

1.       The Agency shall examine any information submitted in consequence of a decision taken
         under Articles 40 or 41, and draft any appropriate decisions in accordance with these
         Articles, if necessary.
L 396/126          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


2.          Once the dossier evaluation is completed, the Agency shall notify the Commission and the
            competent authorities of the Member States of the information obtained and any
            conclusions made. The competent authorities shall use the information obtained from this
            evaluation for the purposes of Article 45(5), Article 59(3) and Article 69(4). The Agency
            shall use the information obtained from this evaluation for the purposes of Article 44.


                                                  Article 43
                     Procedure and time periods for examination of testing proposals

1.          In the case of non phase-in substances, the Agency shall prepare a draft decision in
            accordance with Article 40(3) within 180 days of receiving a registration or downstream
            user report containing a testing proposal.

2.          In the case of phase-in substances, the Agency shall prepare the draft decisions in
            accordance with Article 40(3):

            (a)   by 1 December 2012 for all registrations received by 1 December 2010 containing
                  proposals for testing in order to fulfil the information requirements in Annexes IX
                  and X;

            (b)   by 1 June 2016 for all registrations received by 1 June 2013 containing proposals for
                  testing in order to fulfil the information requirements in Annex IX only;

            (c)   by 1 June 2022 for any registrations containing testing proposals received by 1 June
                  2018.

3.          The list of registration dossiers being evaluated under Article 40 shall be made available to
            Member States.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/127


                                            Chapter 2
                                    Substance evaluation


                                               Article 44
                                  Criteria for substance evaluation

1.       In order to ensure a harmonised approach, the Agency shall in cooperation with the
         Member States develop criteria for prioritising substances with a view to further
         evaluation. Prioritisation shall be on a risk-based approach. The criteria shall consider:

         (a)   hazard information, for instance structural similarity of the substance with known
               substances of concern or with substances which are persistent and liable to
               bio-accumulate, suggesting that the substance or one or more of its transformation
               products has properties of concern or is persistent and liable to bio-accumulate;

         (b)   exposure information;

         (c)   tonnage, including aggregated tonnage from the registrations submitted by several
               registrants.
L 396/128           EN               Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


2.          The Agency shall use the criteria in paragraph 1 for the purpose of compiling a draft
            Community rolling action plan which shall cover a period of three years and shall specify
            substances to be evaluated each year. Substances shall be included if there are grounds for
            considering (either on the basis of a dossier evaluation carried out by the Agency or on the
            basis of any other appropriate source, including information in the registration dossier) that
            a given substance constitutes a risk to human health or the environment. The Agency shall
            submit the first draft rolling action plan to the Member States by 1 December 2011. The
            Agency shall submit draft annual updates to the rolling action plan to the Member States
            by 28 February each year.

            The Agency shall adopt the final Community rolling action plan on the basis of an opinion
            from the Member State Committee set up under Article 76(1)(e) (hereinafter referred to as
            "the Member State Committee") and shall publish the plan on its website, identifying the
            Member State who will carry out the evaluation of the substances listed therein as
            determined according to Article 45.


                                                  Article 45
                                            Competent authority

1.          The Agency shall be responsible for coordinating the substance evaluation process and
            ensuring that substances on the Community rolling action plan are evaluated. In doing so,
            the Agency shall rely on the competent authorities of Member States. In carrying out an
            evaluation of a substance, the competent authorities may appoint another body to act on
            their behalf.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/129


2.       A Member State may choose (a) substance(s) from the draft Community rolling action
         plan, with the aim of becoming a competent authority for the purposes of Articles 46, 47
         and 48. In the event of a substance from the draft Community rolling action plan not being
         chosen by any Member State, the Agency shall ensure that the substance is evaluated.

3.       In cases where two or more Member States have expressed an interest in evaluating the
         same substance and they cannot agree who should be the competent authority, the
         competent authority for the purposes of Articles 46, 47 and 48 shall be determined in
         accordance with the following procedure.

         The Agency shall refer the matter to the Member State Committee, in order to agree which
         authority shall be the competent authority, taking into account the Member State in which
         the manufacturer(s) or importer(s) is located, the respective proportions of total
         Community gross domestic product, the number of substances already being evaluated by
         a Member State and the expertise available.

         If, within 60 days of the referral, the Member State Committee reaches unanimous
         agreement, the Member States concerned shall adopt substances for evaluation
         accordingly.

         If the Member State Committee fails to reach a unanimous agreement, the Agency shall
         submit the conflicting opinions to the Commission, which shall decide which authority
         shall be the competent authority, in accordance with the procedure referred to in
         Article 133(3), and the Member States concerned shall adopt substances for evaluation
         accordingly.
L 396/130          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


4.          The competent authority identified in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 shall evaluate
            the allocated substances in accordance with this Chapter.

5.          A Member State may notify the Agency at any time of a substance not on the Community
            rolling action plan, whenever it is in possession of information which suggests that the
            substance is a priority for evaluation. The Agency shall decide whether to add this
            substance to the Community rolling action plan on the basis of an opinion from the
            Member State Committee. If the substance is added to the Community rolling action plan,
            the proposing Member State, or another Member State who agrees, shall evaluate that
            substance.


                                                   Article 46
                   Requests for further information and check of information submitted

1.          If the competent authority considers that further information is required, including, if
            appropriate, information not required in Annexes VII to X, it shall prepare a draft decision,
            stating reasons, requiring the registrant(s) to submit the further information and setting a
            deadline for its submission. A draft decision shall be prepared within 12 months of the
            publication of the Community rolling action plan on the Agency's website for substances to
            be evaluated that year. The decision shall be taken in accordance with the procedure laid
            down in Articles 50 and 52.

2.          The registrant shall submit the information required to the Agency by the deadline set.

3.          The competent authority shall examine any information submitted, and shall draft any
            appropriate decisions in accordance with this Article, if necessary, within 12 months of the
            information being submitted.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/131


4.       The competent authority shall finish its evaluation activities within 12 months of the start
         of the evaluation of the substance or within 12 months of the information being submitted
         under paragraph 2, and notify the Agency accordingly. If this deadline is exceeded, the
         evaluation shall be deemed to be finished.


                                               Article 47
                                   Coherence with other activities

1.       An evaluation of a substance shall be based on all relevant information submitted on that
         particular substance and on any previous evaluation under this Title. Where information on
         intrinsic properties of a substance has been generated by reference to structurally related
         substance(s), the evaluation may also cover these related substances. In cases where a
         decision on an evaluation has been previously taken in accordance with Article 51 or
         Article 52, any draft decision requiring further information under Article 46 may be
         justified only by a change of circumstances or acquired knowledge.

2.       In order to ensure a harmonised approach to requests for further information, the Agency
         shall monitor draft decisions under Article 46 and shall develop criteria and priorities.
         Where appropriate, implementing measures shall be adopted in accordance with the
         procedure referred to in Article 133(3).
L 396/132          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006



                                                   Article 48
                                     Follow-up to substance evaluation

Once the substance evaluation has been completed, the competent authority shall consider how to
use the information obtained from this evaluation for the purposes of Article 59(3), Article 69(4)
and Article 115(1). The competent authority shall inform the Agency of its conclusions as to
whether or how to use the information obtained. The Agency shall in turn inform the Commission,
the registrant and the competent authorities of the other Member States.


                                                Chapter 3
                                  Evaluation of intermediates


                                                   Article 49
                           Further information on on-site isolated intermediates

For on-site isolated intermediates that are used in strictly controlled conditions, neither dossier nor
substance evaluation shall apply. However, where the competent authority of the Member State in
whose territory the site is located considers that a risk to human health or the environment,
equivalent to the level of concern arising from the use of substances meeting the criteria in
Article 57, arises from the use of an on-site isolated intermediate and that risk is not properly
controlled, it may:

(a)         require the registrant to submit further information directly related to the risk identified.
            This request shall be accompanied by a written justification;
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                          L 396/133


(b)      examine any information submitted and, if necessary, recommend any appropriate risk
         reduction measures to address the risks identified in relation to the site in question.

The procedure provided for in the first paragraph may be undertaken only by the competent
authority referred to therein. The competent authority shall inform the Agency of the results of such
an evaluation, which shall then inform the competent authorities of the other Member States and
make the results available to them.


                                             Chapter 4
                                      Common provisions


                                                Article 50
                              Registrants' and downstream users' rights

1.       The Agency shall notify any draft decision under Articles 40, 41 or 46 to the registrant(s)
         or downstream user(s) concerned, informing them of their right to comment within 30 days
         of receipt. If the concerned registrant(s) or downstream user(s) wish to comment, they shall
         provide their comments to the Agency. The Agency in turn shall inform the competent
         authority of the submission of the comments without delay. The competent authority (for
         decisions taken under Article 46) and the Agency (for decisions taken under Articles 40
         and 41) shall take any comments received into account and may amend the draft decision
         accordingly.
L 396/134          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


2.          If a registrant has ceased the manufacture or import of the substance, or the production or
            import of an article, or the downstream user the use, he shall inform the Agency of this fact
            with the consequence that the registered volume in his registration, if appropriate, shall be
            put to zero and no further information may be requested with respect to that substance,
            unless the registrant notifies the restart of the manufacture or import of the substance or the
            production or import of the article, or the downstream user notifies the restart of the use.
            The Agency shall inform the competent authority of the Member State in which the
            registrant or downstream user is located.

3.          The registrant may cease the manufacture or import of the substance or the production or
            import of the article, or the downstream user the use, upon receipt of the draft decision. In
            such cases, the registrant, or downstream user, shall inform the Agency of this fact with the
            consequence that his registration, or report, shall no longer be valid, and no further
            information may be requested with respect to that substance, unless he submits a new
            registration or report. The Agency shall inform the competent authority of the Member
            State in which the registrant or downstream user is located.

4.          Notwithstanding paragraphs 2 and 3, further information may be required in accordance
            with Article 46 in either or both of the following cases:

            (a)   where the competent authority prepares a dossier in accordance with Annex XV
                  concluding that there is a potential long-term risk to human health or the
                  environment justifying the need for further information;
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/135


         (b)   where the exposure to the substance manufactured or imported by the registrant(s), or
               to the substance in the article produced or imported by the registrant(s), or to the
               substance used by the downstream user(s) contributes significantly to that risk.

         The procedure in Articles 69 to 73 shall apply mutatis mutandis.


                                                Article 51
                           Adoption of decisions under dossier evaluation

1.       The Agency shall notify its draft decision in accordance with Articles 40 or 41, together
         with the comments of the registrant, to the competent authorities of the Member States.

2.       Within 30 days of circulation, the Member States may propose amendments to the draft
         decision to the Agency.

3.       If the Agency does not receive any proposals, it shall take the decision in the version
         notified under paragraph 1.

4.       If the Agency receives a proposal for amendment, it may modify the draft decision. The
         Agency shall refer a draft decision, together with any amendments proposed, to the
         Member State Committee within 15 days of the end of the 30-day period referred to in
         paragraph 2.
L 396/136          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                   30.12.2006


5.          The Agency shall forthwith communicate any proposal for amendment to any registrants or
            downstream users concerned and allow them to comment within 30 days. The Member
            State Committee shall take any comments received into account.

6.          If, within 60 days of the referral, the Member State Committee reaches a unanimous
            agreement on the draft decision, the Agency shall take the decision accordingly.

7.          If the Member State Committee fails to reach unanimous agreement, the Commission shall
            prepare a draft decision to be taken in accordance with the procedure referred to in
            Article 133(3).

8.          An appeal may be brought, in accordance with Articles 91, 92 and 93, against Agency
            decisions under paragraphs 3 and 6 of this Article.


                                                   Article 52
                              Adoption of decisions under substance evaluation

1.          The competent authority shall circulate its draft decision in accordance with Article 46,
            together with any comments by the registrant or downstream user, to the Agency and to the
            competent authorities of the other Member States.

2.          The provisions of Article 51(2) to (8) shall apply mutatis mutandis.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/137



                                                Article 53
                        Cost sharing for tests without an agreement between
                                 registrants and/or downstream users

1.       Where registrants or downstream users are required to perform a test as a result of a
         decision taken under this Title, those registrants or downstream users shall make every
         effort to reach an agreement as to who is to carry it out on behalf of the other registrants or
         downstream users and to inform the Agency accordingly within 90 days. If the Agency is
         not informed of such agreement within such 90 days, it shall designate one of the
         registrants or downstream users to perform the test on behalf of all of them.

2.       If a registrant or downstream user performs a test on behalf of others, they shall all share
         the cost of that study equally.

3.       In the case referred to in paragraph 1, the registrant or downstream user who performs the
         test shall provide each of the others concerned with a copy of the full study report.

4.       The person performing and submitting the study shall have a claim against the others
         accordingly. Any person concerned shall be able to make a claim in order to prohibit
         another person from manufacturing, importing or placing the substance on the market if
         that other person either fails to pay his share of the cost or to provide security for that
         amount or fails to hand over a copy of the full study report of the study performed. All
         claims shall be enforceable in the national courts. Any person may choose to submit their
         claims for remuneration to an arbitration board and accept the arbitration order.
L 396/138        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006



                                                  Article 54
                               Publication of information on evaluation

By 28 February of each year, the Agency shall publish on its website a report on the progress made
over the previous calendar year towards discharging the obligations incumbent upon it in relation to
evaluation. This report shall include, in particular, recommendations to potential registrants in order
to improve the quality of future registrations.

                                             TITLE VII
                                       AUTHORISATION


                                             Chapter 1
                                Authorisation requirement


                                                  Article 55
                       Aim of authorisation and considerations for substitution

The aim of this Title is to ensure the good functioning of the internal market while assuring that the
risks from substances of very high concern are properly controlled and that these substances are
progressively replaced by suitable alternative substances or technologies where these are
economically and technically viable. To this end all manufacturers, importers and downstream users
applying for authorisations shall analyse the availability of alternatives and consider their risks, and
the technical and economic feasibility of substitution.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/139



                                               Article 56
                                         General provisions

1.       A manufacturer, importer or downstream user shall not place a substance on the market for
         a use or use it himself if that substance is included in Annex XIV, unless:

         (a)   the use(s) of that substance on its own or in a preparation or the incorporation of the
               substance into an article for which the substance is placed on the market or for which
               he uses the substance himself has been authorised in accordance with Articles 60 to
               64; or

         (b)   the use(s) of that substance on its own or in a preparation or the incorporation of the
               substance into an article for which the substance is placed on the market or for which
               he uses the substance himself has been exempted from the authorisation requirement
               in Annex XIV itself in accordance with Article 58(2); or

         (c)   the date referred to in Article 58(1)(c)(i) has not been reached; or

         (d)   the date referred to in Article 58(1)(c)(i) has been reached and he made an
               application 18 months before that date but a decision on the application for
               authorisation has not yet been taken; or

         (e)   in cases where the substance is placed on the market, authorisation for that use has
               been granted to his immediate downstream user.
L 396/140          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


2.          A downstream user may use a substance meeting the criteria set out in paragraph 1
            provided that the use is in accordance with the conditions of an authorisation granted to an
            actor up his supply chain for that use.

3.          Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the use of substances in scientific research and
            development. Annex XIV shall specify if paragraphs 1 and 2 apply to product and process
            orientated research and development as well as the maximum quantity exempted.

4.          Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the following uses of substances:

            (a)   uses in plant protection products within the scope of Directive 91/414/EEC;

            (b)   uses in biocidal products within the scope of Directive 98/8/EC;

            (c)   use as motor fuels covered by Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of
                  the Council of 13 October 1998 relating to the quality of petrol and diesel fuels1;

            (d)   uses as fuel in mobile or fixed combustion plants of mineral oil products and use as
                  fuels in closed systems.

5.          In the case of substances that are subject to authorisation only because they meet the
            criteria in Article 57(a), (b) or (c) or because they are identified in accordance with
            Article 57(f) only because of hazards to human health, paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article
            shall not apply to the following uses:

            (a)   uses in cosmetic products within the scope of Directive 76/768/EEC;




1
       OJ L 350, 28.12.1998, p. 58. Directive as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/141


         (b)   uses in food contact materials within the scope of Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004.

6.       Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the use of substances when they are present in
         preparations:

         (a)   for substances referred to in Article 57(d), (e) and (f), below a concentration limit of
               0,1 % weight by weight (w/w);

         (b)   for all other substances, below the lowest of the concentration limits specified in
               Directive 1999/45/EC or in Annex I to Directive 67/548/EEC which result in the
               classification of the preparation as dangerous.


                                               Article 57
                               Substances to be included in Annex XIV

The following substances may be included in Annex XIV in accordance with the procedure laid
down in Article 58:

(a)      substances meeting the criteria for classification as carcinogenic category 1 or 2 in
         accordance with Directive 67/548/EEC;

(b)      substances meeting the criteria for classification as mutagenic category 1 or 2 in
         accordance with Directive 67/548/EEC;
L 396/142          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


(c)         substances meeting the criteria for classification as toxic for reproduction category 1 or 2
            in accordance with Directive 67/548/EEC;

(d)         substances which are persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic in accordance with the criteria
            set out in Annex XIII of this Regulation;

(e)         substances which are very persistent and very bioaccumulative in accordance with the
            criteria set out in Annex XIII of this Regulation;

(f)         substances - such as those having endocrine disrupting properties or those having
            persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic properties or very persistent and very
            bioaccumulative properties, which do not fulfil the criteria of points (d) or (e) - for which
            there is scientific evidence of probable serious effects to human health or the environment
            which give rise to an equivalent level of concern to those of other substances listed in
            points (a) to (e) and which are identified on a case-by-case basis in accordance with the
            procedure set out in Article 59.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/143



                                                Article 58
                                 Inclusion of substances in Annex XIV

1.       Whenever a decision is taken to include in Annex XIV substances referred to in Article 57,
         such a decision shall be taken in accordance with the procedure referred to in
         Article 133(4). It shall specify for each substance:

         (a)   the identity of the substance as specified in section 2 of Annex VI;

         (b)   the intrinsic property (properties) of the substance referred to in Article 57;

         (c)   transitional arrangements:

               (i)    the date(s) from which the placing on the market and the use of the substance
                      shall be prohibited unless an authorisation is granted (hereinafter referred to as
                      "the sunset date") which should take into account, where appropriate, the
                      production cycle specified for that use;

               (ii)   a date or dates at least 18 months before the sunset date(s) by which
                      applications must be received if the applicant wishes to continue to use the
                      substance or place it on the market for certain uses after the sunset date(s);
                      these continued uses shall be allowed after the sunset date until a decision on
                      the application for authorisation is taken;
L 396/144          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


            (d)   review periods for certain uses, if appropriate;

            (e)   uses or categories of uses exempted from the authorisation requirement, if any, and
                  conditions for such exemptions, if any.

2.          Uses or categories of uses may be exempted from the authorisation requirement provided
            that, on the basis of the existing specific Community legislation imposing minimum
            requirements relating to the protection of human health or the environment for the use of
            the substance, the risk is properly controlled. In the establishment of such exemptions,
            account shall be taken, in particular, of the proportionality of risk to human health and the
            environment related to the nature of the substance, such as where the risk is modified by
            the physical form.

3.          Prior to a decision to include substances in Annex XIV, the Agency shall, taking into
            account the opinion of the Member State Committee, recommend priority substances to be
            included specifying for each substance the items set out in paragraph 1. Priority shall
            normally be given to substances with:

            (a)   PBT or vPvB properties; or

            (b)   wide dispersive use; or

            (c)   high volumes.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/145


         The number of substances included in Annex XIV and the dates specified under
         paragraph 1 shall also take account of the Agency's capacity to handle applications in the
         time provided for. The Agency shall make its first recommendation of priority substances
         to be included in Annex XIV by 1 June 2009. The Agency shall make further
         recommendations at least every second year with a view to including further substances in
         Annex XIV.

4.       Before the Agency sends its recommendation to the Commission it shall make it publicly
         available on its website, clearly indicating the date of publication, taking into account
         Articles 118 and 119 on access to information. The Agency shall invite all interested
         parties to submit comments within three months of the date of publication, in particular on
         uses which should be exempt from the authorisation requirement.

         The Agency shall update its recommendation, taking into account the comments received.

5.       Subject to paragraph 6, after inclusion of a substance in Annex XIV, this substance shall
         not be subjected to new restrictions under the procedure outlined in Title VIII covering the
         risks to human health or the environment from the use of the substance on its own, in a
         preparation or incorporation of a substance in an article arising from the intrinsic properties
         specified in Annex XIV.

6.       A substance listed in Annex XIV may be subjected to new restrictions under the procedure
         outlined in Title VIII covering the risks to human health or the environment from the
         presence of the substance in (an) article(s).
L 396/146             EN                Official Journal of the European Union                   30.12.2006


7.          Substances for which all uses have been prohibited under Title VIII or by other
            Community legislation shall not be included in Annex XIV or shall be removed from it.

8.          Substances which as a result of new information no longer meet the criteria of Article 57
            shall be removed from Annex XIV in accordance with the procedure referred to in
            Article 133(4).


                                                     Article 59
                              Identification of substances referred to in Article 57

1.          The procedure set out in paragraphs 2 to 10 of this Article shall apply for the purpose of
            identifying substances meeting the criteria referred to in Article 57 and establishing a
            candidate list for eventual inclusion in Annex XIV. The Agency shall indicate, within this
            list, the substances that are on its work programme according to Article 83(3)(e).

2.          The Commission may ask the Agency to prepare a dossier in accordance with relevant
            sections of Annex XV for substances which in its opinion meet the criteria set out in
            Article 57. The dossier may be limited, if appropriate, to a reference to an entry in Annex I
            of Directive 67/548/EEC. The Agency shall make this dossier available to the Member
            States.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/147


3.       Any Member State may prepare a dossier in accordance with Annex XV for substances
         which in its opinion meet the criteria set out in Article 57 and forward it to the Agency.
         The dossier may be limited, if appropriate, to a reference to an entry in Annex I of
         Directive 67/548/EEC. The Agency shall make this dossier available within 30 days of
         receipt to the other Member States.

4.       The Agency shall publish on its website a notice that an Annex XV dossier has been
         prepared for a substance. The Agency shall invite all interested parties to submit comments
         within a specified deadline to the Agency.

5.       Within 60 days of circulation, the other Member States or the Agency may comment on the
         identification of the substance in relation to the criteria in Article 57 in the dossier to the
         Agency.

6.       If the Agency does not receive or make any comments, it shall include this substance on
         the list referred to in paragraph 1. The Agency may include this substance in its
         recommendations under Article 58(3).

7.       When comments are made or received, the Agency shall refer the dossier to the Member
         State Committee within 15 days of the end of the 60-day period referred to in paragraph 5.
L 396/148          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


8.          If, within 30 days of the referral, the Member State Committee reaches a unanimous
            agreement on the identification, the Agency shall include the substance in the list referred
            to in paragraph 1. The Agency may include that substance in its recommendations under
            Article 58(3).

9.          If the Member State Committee fails to reach a unanimous agreement, the Commission
            shall prepare a draft proposal on the identification of the substance within three months of
            receipt of the opinion of the Member State Committee. A final decision on the
            identification of the substance shall be taken in accordance with the procedure referred to
            in Article 133(3).

10.         The Agency shall publish and update the list referred to in paragraph 1 on its website
            without delay after a decision on inclusion of a substance has been taken.


                                               Chapter 2
                                  Granting of authorisations


                                                  Article 60
                                        Granting of authorisations

1.          The Commission shall be responsible for taking decisions on applications for
            authorisations in accordance with this Title.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/149


2.       Without prejudice to paragraph 3, an authorisation shall be granted if the risk to human
         health or the environment from the use of a substance arising from the intrinsic properties
         specified in Annex XIV is adequately controlled in accordance with section 6.4 of Annex I
         and as documented in the applicant's chemical safety report, taking into account the
         opinion of the Committee for Risk Assessment referred to in Article 64(4)(a). When
         granting the authorisation, and in any conditions imposed therein, the Commission shall
         take into account all discharges, emissions and losses, including risks arising from diffuse
         or dispersive uses, known at the time of the decision.

         The Commission shall not consider the risks to human health arising from the use of a
         substance in a medical device regulated by Council Directive 90/385/EEC of 20 June 1990
         on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to active implantable
         medical devices1, Council Directive 93/42/EEC of 14 June 1993 concerning medical
         devices2 or Directive 98/79/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
         27 October 1998 on in vitro diagnostic medical devices3.

3.       Paragraph 2 shall not apply to:

         (a)   substances meeting the criteria in Article 57(a), (b), (c) or (f) for which it is not
               possible to determine a threshold in accordance with section 6.4 of Annex I;

         (b)   substances meeting the criteria in Article 57(d) or (e);




1
       OJ L 189, 20.7.1990, p. 17. Directive as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003.
2
       OJ L 169, 12.7.1993, p. 1. Directive as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003.
3
       OJ L 331, 7.12.1998, p. 1. Directive as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003.
L 396/150          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


            (c)   substances identified under Article 57(f) having persistent, bioaccumulative and
                  toxic properties or very persistent and very bioaccumulative properties.

4.          If an authorisation cannot be granted under paragraph 2 or for substances listed in
            paragraph 3, an authorisation may only be granted if it is shown that socio-economic
            benefits outweigh the risk to human health or the environment arising from the use of the
            substance and if there are no suitable alternative substances or technologies. This decision
            shall be taken after consideration of all of the following elements and taking into account
            the opinions of the Committee for Risk Assessment and the Committee for
            Socio-economic Analysis referred to in Article 64(4)(a) and (b):

            (a)   the risk posed by the uses of the substance, including the appropriateness and
                  effectiveness of the risk management measures proposed;

            (b)   the socio-economic benefits arising from its use and the socio-economic implications
                  of a refusal to authorise as demonstrated by the applicant or other interested parties;

            (c)   the analysis of the alternatives submitted by the applicant under Article 62(4)(e) or
                  any substitution plan submitted by the applicant under Article 62(4)(f), and any
                  third party contributions submitted under Article 64(2);

            (d)   available information on the risks to human health or the environment of any
                  alternative substances or technologies.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/151


5.       When assessing whether suitable alternative substances or technologies are available, all
         relevant aspects shall be taken into account by the Commission, including:

         (a)   whether the transfer to alternatives would result in reduced overall risks to human
               health and the environment, taking into account the appropriateness and effectiveness
               of risk management measures;

         (b)   the technical and economic feasibility of alternatives for the applicant.

6.       A use shall not be authorised if this would constitute a relaxation of a restriction set out in
         Annex XVII.

7.       An authorisation shall be granted only if the application is made in conformity with the
         requirements of Article 62.

8.       Authorisations shall be subject to a time-limited review without prejudice to any decision
         on a future review period and shall normally be subject to conditions, including
         monitoring. The duration of the time-limited review for any authorisation shall be
         determined on a case-by-case basis taking into account all relevant information including
         the elements listed in paragraph 4(a) to (d), as appropriate.

9.       The authorisation shall specify:

         (a)   the person(s) to whom the authorisation is granted;

         (b)   the identity of the substance(s);
L 396/152          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


            (c)   the use(s) for which the authorisation is granted;

            (d)   any conditions under which the authorisation is granted;

            (e)   the time-limited review period;

            (f)   any monitoring arrangement.

10.         Notwithstanding any conditions of an authorisation, the holder shall ensure that the
            exposure is reduced to as low a level as is technically and practically possible.


                                                   Article 61
                                          Review of authorisations

1.          Authorisations granted in accordance with Article 60 shall be regarded as valid until the
            Commission decides to amend or withdraw the authorisation in the context of a review,
            provided that the holder of the authorisation submits a review report at least 18 months
            before the expiry of the time-limited review period. Rather than re-submitting all elements
            of the original application for the current authorisation, the holder of an authorisation
            may submit only the number of the current authorisation, subject to the second, third and
            fourth subparagraphs.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/153


         A holder of an authorisation granted in accordance with Article 60 shall submit an update
         of the analysis of alternatives referred to in Article 62(4)(e), including information about
         any relevant research and development activities by the applicant, if appropriate, and any
         substitution plan submitted under Article 62(4)(f). If the update of the analysis of
         alternatives shows that there is a suitable alternative available taking into account the
         elements in Article 60(5), he shall submit a substitution plan, including a timetable for
         proposed actions by the applicant. If the holder cannot demonstrate that the risk is
         adequately controlled, he shall also submit an update of the socio-economic analysis
         contained in the original application.

         If he can now demonstrate that the risk is adequately controlled, he shall submit an update
         of the chemical safety report.

         If any other elements of the original application have changed, he shall also submit updates
         of these element(s).

         When any updated information is submitted in accordance with this paragraph, any
         decision to amend or withdraw the authorisation in the context of the review shall be taken
         in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 64 applied mutatis mutandis.
L 396/154          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


2.          Authorisations may be reviewed at any time if:

            (a)   the circumstances of the original authorisation have changed so as to affect the risk
                  to human health or the environment, or the socio-economic impact; or

            (b)   new information on possible substitutes becomes available.

            The Commission shall set a reasonable deadline by which the holder(s) of the authorisation
            may submit further information necessary for the review and indicate by when it will take
            a decision in accordance with Article 64.

3.          In its review decision the Commission may, if circumstances have changed and taking into
            account the principle of proportionality, amend or withdraw the authorisation, if under the
            changed circumstances it would not have been granted or if suitable alternatives in
            accordance with Article 60(5) become available. In the latter case the Commission shall
            require the holder of the authorisation to present a substitution plan if he has not already
            done so as part of his application or update.

            In cases where there is a serious and immediate risk for human health or the environment,
            the Commission may suspend the authorisation pending the review, taking into account the
            principle of proportionality.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                    L 396/155


4.       If an environmental quality standard referred to in Directive 96/61/EC is not met, the
         authorisations granted for the use of the substance concerned may be reviewed.

5.       If the environmental objectives as referred to in Article 4(1) of Directive 2000/60/EC are
         not met, the authorisations granted for the use of the substance concerned in the relevant
         river basin may be reviewed.

6.       If a use of a substance is subsequently prohibited or otherwise restricted in
         Regulation (EC) No 850/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
         29 April 2004 on persistent organic pollutants1, the Commission shall withdraw the
         authorisation for that use.


                                                 Article 62
                                       Applications for authorisations

1.       An application for an authorisation shall be made to the Agency.

2.       Applications for authorisation may be made by the manufacturer(s), importer(s) and/or
         downstream user(s) of the substance. Applications may be made by one or several persons.

3.       Applications may be made for one or several substances, that meet the definition of a
         group of substances in section 1.5 of Annex XI, and for one or several uses. Applications
         may be made for the applicant's own use(s) and/or for uses for which he intends to place
         the substance on the market.




1
       OJ L 158, 30.4.2004, p. 7. Corrected in OJ L 229, 29.6.2004, p. 5.
L 396/156          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


4.          An application for authorisation shall include the following information:

            (a)   the identity of the substance(s), as referred to in section 2 of Annex VI;

            (b)   the name and contact details of the person or persons making the application;

            (c)   a request for authorisation, specifying for which use(s) the authorisation is sought
                  and covering the use of the substance in preparations and/or the incorporation of the
                  substance in articles, where this is relevant;

            (d)   unless already submitted as part of the registration, a chemical safety report in
                  accordance with Annex I covering the risks to human health and/or the environment
                  from the use of the substance(s) arising from the intrinsic properties specified in
                  Annex XIV;

            (e)   an analysis of the alternatives considering their risks and the technical and economic
                  feasibility of substitution and including, if appropriate information about any relevant
                  research and development activities by the applicant;

            (f)   where the analysis referred to in point (e) shows that suitable alternatives are
                  available, taking into account the elements in Article 60(5), a substitution plan
                  including a timetable for proposed actions by the applicant.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                    L 396/157


5.       The application may include:

         (a)   a socio-economic analysis conducted in accordance with Annex XVI;

         (b)   a justification for not considering risks to human health and the environment arising
               either from:

               (i)    emissions of a substance from an installation for which a permit was granted in
                      accordance with Directive 96/61/EC; or

               (ii)   discharges of a substance from a point source governed by the requirement for
                      prior regulation referred to in Article 11(3)(g) of Directive 2000/60/EC and
                      legislation adopted under Article 16 of that Directive.

6.       The application shall not include the risks to human health arising from the use of a
         substance in a medical device regulated by Directives 90/385/EEC, 93/42/EEC or
         98/79/EC.

7.       An application for an authorisation shall be accompanied by the fee required in accordance
         with Title IX.
L 396/158          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006



                                                  Article 63
                                 Subsequent applications for authorisation

1.          If an application has been made for a use of a substance, a subsequent applicant may refer
            to the appropriate parts of the previous application submitted in accordance with
            Article 62(4)(d), (e) and (f) and (5)(a), provided that the subsequent applicant has
            permission from the previous applicant to refer to these parts of the application.

2.          If an authorisation has been granted for a use of a substance, a subsequent applicant may
            refer to the appropriate parts of the previous application submitted in accordance with
            Article 62(4)(d), (e) and (f) and (5)(a), provided that the subsequent applicant has
            permission from the holder of the authorisation to refer to these parts of the application.

3.          Before referring to any previous application in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2, the
            subsequent applicant shall update the information of the original application as necessary.


                                                  Article 64
                                   Procedure for authorisation decisions

1.          The Agency shall acknowledge the date of receipt of the application. The Agency's
            Committees for Risk Assessment and Socio-economic Analysis shall give their draft
            opinions within ten months of the date of receipt of the application.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/159


2.       The Agency shall make available on its web-site broad information on uses, taking into
         account Articles 118 and 119 on access to information, for which applications have been
         received and for reviews of authorisations, with a deadline by which information on
         alternative substances or technologies may be submitted by interested third parties.

3.       In preparing its opinion, each Committee referred to in paragraph 1 shall first check that
         the application includes all the information specified in Article 62 that is relevant to its
         remit. If necessary, the Committees shall, in consultation with each other, make a joint
         request to the applicant for additional information to bring the application into conformity
         with the requirements of Article 62. The Committee for Socio-economic Analysis may, if
         it deems it necessary, require the applicant or request third parties to submit, within a
         specified time period, additional information on possible alternative substances or
         technologies. Each Committee shall also take into account any information submitted by
         third parties.

4.       The draft opinions shall include the following elements:

         (a)   Committee for Risk Assessment: an assessment of the risk to human health and/or
               the environment arising from the use(s) of the substance, including the
               appropriateness and effectiveness of the risk management measures as described in
               the application and, if relevant, an assessment of the risks arising from possible
               alternatives;
L 396/160          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


            (b)   Committee for Socio-economic Analysis: an assessment of the socio-economic
                  factors and the availability, suitability and technical feasibility of alternatives
                  associated with the use(s) of the substance as described in the application, when an
                  application is made in accordance with Article 62 and of any third party
                  contributions submitted under paragraph 2 of this Article.

5.          The Agency shall send these draft opinions to the applicant by the end of the deadline set
            out in paragraph 1. Within one month of receipt of the draft opinion, the applicant may
            provide written notice that he wishes to comment. The draft opinion shall be deemed to
            have been received seven days after the Agency has sent it.

            If the applicant does not wish to comment, the Agency shall send these opinions to the
            Commission, the Member States and the applicant, within 15 days of the end of the period
            within which the applicant may comment or within 15 days of receipt of notice from the
            applicant that he does not intend to comment.

            If the applicant wishes to comment, he shall send his written argumentation to the Agency
            within two months of the receipt of the draft opinion. The Committees shall consider the
            comments and adopt their final opinions within two months of receipt of the written
            argumentation, taking this argumentation into account where appropriate. Within a further
            15 days the Agency shall send the opinions, with the written argumentation attached, to the
            Commission, the Member States and the applicant.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/161


6.       The Agency shall determine in accordance with Articles 118 and 119 which parts of its
         opinions and parts of any attachments thereto should be made publicly available on its
         website.

7.       In cases covered by Article 63(1), the Agency shall treat the applications together,
         provided the deadlines for the first application can be met.

8.       The Commission shall prepare a draft authorisation decision within three months of receipt
         of the opinions from the Agency. A final decision granting or refusing the authorisation
         shall be taken in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 133(2).

9.       Summaries of the Commission decisions, including the authorisation number and the
         reasons for the decision, in particular where suitable alternatives exist, shall be published
         in the Official Journal of the European Union and shall be made publicly available in a
         database established and kept up to date by the Agency.

10.      In cases covered by Article 63(2), the deadline set out in paragraph 1 of this Article shall
         be shortened to five months.
L 396/162          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  30.12.2006


                                               Chapter 3
                            Authorisations in the supply chain


                                                  Article 65
                                 Obligation of holders of authorisations

Holders of an authorisation, as well as downstream users referred to in Article 56(2) including the
substances in a preparation, shall include the authorisation number on the label before they place the
substance or a preparation containing the substance on the market for an authorised use without
prejudice to Directive 67/548/EEC and Directive 1999/45/EC. This shall be done without delay
once the authorisation number has been made publicly available in accordance with Article 64(9).


                                                  Article 66
                                             Downstream users

1.          Downstream users using a substance in accordance with Article 56(2) shall notify the
            Agency within three months of the first supply of the substance.

2.          The Agency shall establish and keep up to date a register of downstream users who have
            made a notification in accordance with paragraph 1. The Agency shall grant access to this
            register to the competent authorities of the Member States.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/163


                                            TITLE VIII
                     RESTRICTIONS ON THE MANUFACTURING,
                      PLACING ON THE MARKET AND USE OF
                        CERTAIN DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES,
                            PREPARATIONS AND ARTICLES


                                               Chapter 1
                                         General issues


                                                Article 67
                                         General provisions

1.       A substance on its own, in a preparation or in an article, for which Annex XVII contains a
         restriction shall not be manufactured, placed on the market or used unless it complies with
         the conditions of that restriction. This shall not apply to the manufacture, placing on the
         market or use of a substance in scientific research and development. Annex XVII shall
         specify if the restriction shall not apply to product and process orientated research and
         development, as well as the maximum quantity exempted.

2.       Paragraph 1 shall not apply to the use of substances in cosmetic products, as defined by
         Directive 76/768/EEC, with regard to restrictions addressing the risks to human health
         within the scope of that Directive.
L 396/164           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


3.          Until 1 June 2013, a Member State may maintain any existing and more stringent
            restrictions in relation to Annex XVII on the manufacture, placing on the market or use of
            a substance, provided that those restrictions have been notified according to the Treaty.
            The Commission shall compile and publish an inventory of these restrictions by 1 June
            2009.


                                                Chapter 2
                                        Restrictions process


                                                   Article 68
                            Introducing new and amending current restrictions

1.          When there is an unacceptable risk to human health or the environment, arising from the
            manufacture, use or placing on the market of substances, which needs to be addressed on a
            Community-wide basis, Annex XVII shall be amended in accordance with the procedure
            referred to in Article 133(4) by adopting new restrictions, or amending current restrictions
            in Annex XVII, for the manufacture, use or placing on the market of substances on their
            own, in preparations or in articles, pursuant to the procedure set out in Articles 69 to 73.
            Any such decision shall take into account the socio-economic impact of the restriction,
            including the availability of alternatives.

            The first subparagraph shall not apply to the use of a substance as an on-site isolated
            intermediate.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/165


2.       For a substance on its own, in a preparation or in an article which meets the criteria for
         classification as carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic to reproduction, category 1 or 2, and
         could be used by consumers and for which restrictions to consumer use are proposed by
         the Commission, Annex XVII shall be amended in accordance with the procedure referred
         to in Article 133(4). Articles 69 to 73 shall not apply.


                                                Article 69
                                      Preparation of a proposal

1.       If the Commission considers that the manufacture, placing on the market or use of a
         substance on its own, in a preparation or in an article poses a risk to human health or the
         environment that is not adequately controlled and needs to be addressed, it shall ask the
         Agency to prepare a dossier which conforms to the requirements of Annex XV.

2.       After the date referred to in Article 58(1)(c)(i) for a substance listed in Annex XIV, the
         Agency shall consider whether the use of that substance in articles poses a risk to human
         health or the environment that is not adequately controlled. If the Agency considers that
         the risk is not adequately controlled, it shall prepare a dossier which conforms to the
         requirements of Annex XV.

3.       Within 12 months of the receipt of the request from the Commission in paragraph 1 and if
         this dossier demonstrates that action on a Community-wide basis is necessary, beyond any
         measures already in place, the Agency shall suggest restrictions, in order to initiate the
         restrictions process.
L 396/166          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


4.          If a Member State considers that the manufacture, placing on the market or use of a
            substance on its own, in a preparation or in an article poses a risk to human health or the
            environment that is not adequately controlled and needs to be addressed it shall notify the
            Agency that it proposes to prepare a dossier which conforms to the requirements of the
            relevant sections of Annex XV. If the substance is not on the list maintained by the Agency
            referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article, the Member State shall prepare a dossier which
            conforms to the requirements of Annex XV within 12 months of the notification to the
            Agency. If this dossier demonstrates that action on a Community-wide basis is necessary,
            beyond any measures already in place, the Member State shall submit it to the Agency in
            the format outlined in Annex XV, in order to initiate the restrictions process.

            The Agency or Member States shall refer to any dossier, chemical safety report or risk
            assessment submitted to the Agency or Member State under this Regulation. The Agency
            or Member States shall also refer to any relevant risk assessment submitted for the
            purposes of other Community Regulations or Directives. To this end other bodies, such as
            agencies, established under Community law and carrying out a similar task shall provide
            information to the Agency or Member State concerned on request.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/167


         The Committee for Risk Assessment and the Committee for Socio-economic Analysis
         shall check whether the dossier submitted conforms to the requirements of Annex XV.
         Within 30 days of receipt, the respective Committee shall inform the Agency or the
         Member State suggesting restrictions, as to whether the dossier conforms. If the dossier
         does not conform, the reasons shall be given to the Agency or the Member State in writing
         within 45 days of receipt. The Agency or the Member State shall bring the dossier into
         conformity within 60 days of the date of receipt of the reasons from the Committees,
         otherwise the procedure under this Chapter shall be terminated. The Agency shall publish
         without delay the intention of the Commission or of a Member State to instigate a
         restriction procedure for a substance and shall inform those who submitted a registration
         for that substance.

5.       The Agency shall maintain a list of substances for which a dossier conforming to the
         requirements of Annex XV is planned or underway by either the Agency or a
         Member State for the purposes of a proposed restriction. If a substance is on the list, no
         other such dossier shall be prepared. If it is proposed by either a Member State or the
         Agency that an existing restriction listed in Annex XVII should be re-examined a decision
         on whether to do so shall be taken in accordance with the procedure referred to in
         Article 133(2) based on evidence presented by the Member State or the Agency.
L 396/168          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


6.          Without prejudice to Articles 118 and 119, the Agency shall make publicly available on its
            website all dossiers conforming with Annex XV including the restrictions suggested
            pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4 of this Article without delay, clearly indicating the date of
            publication. The Agency shall invite all interested parties to submit individually or jointly
            within 6 months of the date of publication:

            (a)   comments on dossiers and the suggested restrictions;

            (b)   a socio-economic analysis, or information which can contribute to one, of the
                  suggested restrictions, examining the advantages and drawbacks of the proposed
                  restrictions. It shall conform to the requirements in Annex XVI.


                                                  Article 70
                             Agency opinion: Committee for Risk Assessment

Within nine months of the date of publication referred to in Article 69(6), the Committee for Risk
Assessment shall formulate an opinion as to whether the suggested restrictions are appropriate in
reducing the risk to human health and/or the environment, based on its consideration of the relevant
parts of the dossier. This opinion shall take account of the Member State dossier or of the dossier
prepared by the Agency at the request of the Commission, and the views of interested parties
referred to in point (a) of Article 69(6).
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/169



                                               Article 71
                      Agency opinion: Committee for Socio-economic Analysis

1.       Within 12 months of the date of publication referred to in Article 69(6), the Committee
         for Socio-economic Analysis shall formulate an opinion on the suggested restrictions,
         based on its consideration of the relevant parts of the dossier and the socio-economic
         impact. It shall prepare a draft opinion on the suggested restrictions and on the related
         socio-economic impact, taking account of the analyses or information according to
         point (b) of Article 69(6), if there are any. The Agency shall publish the draft opinion on
         its website without delay. The Agency shall invite interested parties to give their comments
         on the draft opinion no later than 60 days from the publication of that draft opinion.

2.       The Committee for Socio-economic Analysis shall without delay adopt its opinion, taking
         into account where appropriate further comments received by the deadline set. This
         opinion shall take account of the comments and socio-economic analyses of interested
         parties submitted under point (b) of Article 69(6) and under paragraph 1 of this Article.

3.       Where the opinion of the Committee for Risk Assessment diverges significantly from the
         restrictions suggested, the Agency may postpone the deadline for the opinion of the
         Committee for Socio-economic Analysis by a maximum of 90 days.
L 396/170          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006



                                                  Article 72
                               Submission of an opinion to the Commission

1.          The Agency shall submit to the Commission without delay the opinions of the Committees
            for Risk Assessment and Socio-economic Analysis on restrictions suggested for substances
            on their own, in preparations or in articles. If one or both of the Committees do not
            formulate an opinion by the deadline set in Article 70 and Article 71(1) the Agency shall
            inform the Commission accordingly, stating the reasons.

2.          Without prejudice to Articles 118 and 119 the Agency shall publish the opinions of the
            two Committees on its website without delay.

3.          The Agency shall provide the Commission and/or Member State on request with all
            documents and evidence submitted to or considered by it.


                                                  Article 73
                                           Commission decision

1.          If the conditions laid down in Article 68 are fulfilled, the Commission shall prepare a draft
            amendment to Annex XVII, within three months of receipt of the opinion of the
            Committee for Socio-economic Analysis or by the end of the deadline established under
            Article 71 if that Committee does not form an opinion, whichever is the earlier.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/171


         Where the draft amendment diverges from the original proposal or if it does not take the
         opinions from the Agency into account, the Commission shall annex a detailed explanation
         of the reasons for the differences.

2.       A final decision shall be taken in accordance with the procedure referred to in
         Article 133(4). The Commission shall send the draft amendment to the Member States at
         least 45 days before voting.

                                               TITLE IX
                                     FEES AND CHARGES



                                                Article 74
                                           Fees and charges

1.       The fees that are required according to Article 6(4), Article 7(1) and (5), Article 9(2),
         Article 11(4), Article 17(2), Article 18(2), Article 19(3), Article 22(5), Article 62(7) and
         Article 92(3) shall be specified in a Commission Regulation adopted in accordance with
         the procedure referred to in Article 133(3) by 1 June 2008.

2.       A fee need not be paid for a registration of a substance in a quantity of between 1 and
         10 tonnes where the registration dossier contains the full information in Annex VII.
L 396/172          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


3.          The structure and amount of the fees referred to in paragraph 1 shall take account of the
            work required by this Regulation to be carried out by the Agency and the competent
            authority and shall be fixed at such a level as to ensure that the revenue derived from them
            when combined with other sources of the Agency's revenue pursuant to Article 96(1) is
            sufficient to cover the cost of the services delivered. The fees set for registration shall take
            into account the work that may be done pursuant to Title VI.

            In the case of Article 6(4), Article 7(1) and (5), Article 9(2), Article 11(4), Article 17(2)
            and Article 18(2), the structure and amount of fees shall take account of the tonnage range
            of the substance being registered.

            In all cases, a reduced fee shall be set for SMEs.

            In the case of Article 11(4), the structure and amount of fees shall take into account
            whether information has been submitted jointly or separately.

            In the case of a request made under Article 10(a)(xi), the structure and amount of fees shall
            take into account the work required by the Agency in assessing the justification.

4.          The Regulation referred to in paragraph 1 shall specify the circumstances under which a
            proportion of the fees will be transferred to the relevant Member State competent authority.

5.          The Agency may collect charges for other services it provides.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/173


                                              TITLE X
                                             AGENCY



                                               Article 75
                                      Establishment and review

1.       A European Chemicals Agency is established for the purposes of managing and in some
         cases carrying out the technical, scientific and administrative aspects of this Regulation
         and to ensure consistency at Community level in relation to these aspects.

2.       The Agency shall be subject to a review by 1 June 2012.


                                               Article 76
                                             Composition

1.       The Agency shall comprise:

         (a)   a Management Board, which shall exercise the responsibilities set out in Article 78;

         (b)   an Executive Director, who shall exercise the responsibilities set out in Article 83;

         (c)   a Committee for Risk Assessment, which shall be responsible for preparing the
               opinion of the Agency on evaluations, applications for authorisation, proposals for
               restrictions and proposals for classification and labelling under Title XI and any
               other questions that arise from the operation of this Regulation relating to risks to
               human health or the environment;
L 396/174          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


            (d)   a Committee for Socio-economic Analysis, which shall be responsible for preparing
                  the opinion of the Agency on applications for authorisation, proposals for
                  restrictions, and any other questions that arise from the operation of this Regulation
                  relating to the socio-economic impact of possible legislative action on substances;

            (e)   a Member State Committee, which shall be responsible for resolving potential
                  divergences of opinions on draft decisions proposed by the Agency or the
                  Member States under Title VI and proposals for identification of substances of very
                  high concern to be subjected to the authorisation procedure under Title VII;

            (f)   a Forum for Exchange of Information on Enforcement (hereinafter referred to as
                  "the Forum") which shall coordinate a network of Member States authorities
                  responsible for enforcement of this Regulation;

            (g)   a Secretariat, which shall work under the leadership of the Executive Director and
                  provide technical, scientific and administrative support for the Committees and the
                  Forum and ensure appropriate coordination between them. It shall also undertake the
                  work required of the Agency under the procedures for pre-registration, registration
                  and evaluation as well as preparation of guidance, database maintenance and
                  information provision;

            (h)   a Board of Appeal, which shall decide on appeals against decisions taken by the
                  Agency.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/175


2.       The Committees referred to in points (c), (d) and (e) of paragraph 1 (hereinafter referred to
         as "the Committees") and the Forum may each establish working groups. For this purpose
         they shall adopt, in accordance with their rules of procedure, precise arrangements for
         delegating certain tasks to these working groups.

3.       The Committees and the Forum may, if they consider it appropriate, seek advice on
         important questions of a general scientific or ethical nature from appropriate sources of
         expertise.


                                                Article 77
                                                  Tasks

1.       The Agency shall provide the Member States and the institutions of the Community with
         the best possible scientific and technical advice on questions relating to chemicals which
         fall within its remit and which are referred to it in accordance with the provisions of this
         Regulation.

2.       The Secretariat shall undertake the following tasks:

         (a)   performing the tasks allotted to it under Title II; including facilitating the efficient
               registration of imported substances, in a way consistent with the Community's
               international trading obligations towards third countries;

         (b)   performing the tasks allotted to it under Title III;
L 396/176          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


            (c)   performing the tasks allotted to it under Title VI;

            (d)   performing the tasks allotted to it under Title VIII;

            (e)   establishing and maintaining database(s) with information on all registered
                  substances, the classification and labelling inventory and the harmonised
                  classification and labelling list. It shall make the information identified in
                  Article 119(1) and (2) in the database(s) publicly available, free of charge, over the
                  Internet, except where a request made under Article 10(a)(xi) is considered justified.
                  The Agency shall make other information in the databases available on request in
                  accordance with Article 118;

            (f)   making publicly available information as to which substances are being, and have
                  been evaluated within 90 days of receipt of the information at the Agency, in
                  accordance with Article 119(1);

            (g)   providing technical and scientific guidance and tools where appropriate for the
                  operation of this Regulation in particular to assist the development of chemical safety
                  reports (in accordance with Article 14, Article 31(1) and Article 37(4)) and
                  application of Article 10(a)(viii), Article 11(3) and Article 19(2) by industry and
                  especially by SMEs; and technical and scientific guidance for the application of
                  Article 7 by producers and importers of articles;

            (h)   providing technical and scientific guidance on the operation of this Regulation for
                  Member State competent authorities and providing support to the helpdesks
                  established by Member States under Title XIII;
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/177


         (i)   providing guidance to stakeholders including Member State competent authorities on
               communication to the public of information on the risks and safe use of substances,
               on their own, in preparations or in articles;

         (j)   providing advice and assistance to manufacturers and importers registering a
               substance in accordance with Article 12(1);

         (k)   preparing explanatory information on this Regulation for other stakeholders;

         (l)   at the Commission's request, providing technical and scientific support for steps to
               improve cooperation between the Community, its Member States, international
               organisations and third countries on scientific and technical issues relating to the
               safety of substances, as well as active participation in technical assistance and
               capacity building activities on sound management of chemicals in developing
               countries;

         (m) keeping a Manual of Decisions and Opinions based on conclusions from the
               Member State Committee regarding interpretation and implementation of this
               Regulation;

         (n)   notification of decisions taken by the Agency;

         (o)   provision of formats for submission of information to the Agency.
L 396/178          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


3.          The Committees shall undertake the following tasks:

            (a)   performing the tasks allotted to them under Titles VI to XI;

            (b)   at the Executive Director's request, providing technical and scientific support for
                  steps to improve cooperation between the Community, its Member States,
                  international organisations and third countries on scientific and technical issues
                  relating to the safety of substances, as well as active participation in technical
                  assistance and capacity building activities on sound management of chemicals in
                  developing countries;

            (c)   at the Executive Director's request, drawing up an opinion on any other aspects
                  concerning the safety of substances on their own, in preparations or in articles.

4.          The Forum shall undertake the following tasks:

            (a)   spreading good practice and highlighting problems at Community level;

            (b)   proposing, coordinating and evaluating harmonised enforcement projects and joint
                  inspections;

            (c)   coordinating exchange of inspectors;

            (d)   identifying enforcement strategies, as well as best practice in enforcement;

            (e)   developing working methods and tools of use to local inspectors;
30.12.2006         EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/179


         (f)      developing an electronic information exchange procedure;

         (g)      liaising with industry, taking particular account of the specific needs of SMEs, and
                  other stakeholders, including relevant international organisations, as necessary;

         (h)      examining proposals for restrictions with a view to advising on enforceability.


                                                  Article 78
                                    Powers of the Management Board

The Management Board shall appoint the Executive Director pursuant to Article 84 and an
accounting officer in accordance with Article 43 of Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2343/2002.

It shall adopt:

(a)      by 30 April each year, the general report of the Agency for the previous year;

(b)      by 31 October each year the work programme of the Agency for the coming year;

(c)      the final budget of the Agency pursuant to Article 96 before the beginning of the financial
         year, adjusting it, where necessary, according to the Community contribution and any other
         revenue of the Agency;

(d)      a multi-annual work programme, which shall be regularly revised.

It shall adopt the internal rules and procedures of the Agency. These rules shall be made public.

It shall perform its duties in relation to the Agency's budget pursuant to Articles 96, 97 and 103.
L 396/180          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


It shall exercise disciplinary authority over the Executive Director.

It shall adopt its rules of procedure.

It shall appoint the Chairman, the members and alternates of the Board of Appeal in accordance
with Article 89.

It shall appoint the members of the Agency committees as set out in Article 85.

It shall forward annually any information relevant to the outcome of the evaluation procedures in
accordance with Article 96(6).


                                                  Article 79
                                  Composition of the Management Board

1.          The Management Board shall be composed of one representative from each Member State
            and a maximum of six representatives appointed by the Commission, including three
            individuals from interested parties without voting rights and in addition two independent
            persons appointed by the European Parliament.

            Each Member State shall nominate a member to the Management Board. The members
            thus nominated shall be appointed by the Council.

2.          Members shall be appointed on the basis of their relevant experience and expertise in the
            field of chemical safety or the regulation of chemicals whilst ensuring there is relevant
            expertise amongst the board members in the fields of general, financial and legal matters.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/181


3.       The duration of the term of office shall be four years. The term of office may be renewed
         once. However, for the first mandate, the Commission shall identify half of its appointees,
         and the Council shall identify 12 of its appointees, for whom this period shall be six years.


                                               Article 80
                              Chairmanship of the Management Board

1.       The Management Board shall elect a Chairman and a Deputy-Chairman from among the
         members with voting rights. The Deputy-Chairman shall automatically take the place of
         the Chairman if he is prevented from attending to his duties.

2.       The terms of office of the Chairman and the Deputy-Chairman shall be two years and shall
         expire when they cease to be members of the Management Board. The term of office shall
         be renewable once.


                                               Article 81
                                 Meetings of the Management Board

1.       The meetings of the Management Board shall be convened by invitation of its Chairman or
         at the request of at least one third of the Board members.

2.       The Executive Director shall take part in the meetings of the Management Board, without
         voting rights.
L 396/182          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                   30.12.2006


3.          The Chairmen of the Committees and the Chairman of the Forum, as referred to in
            Article 76(1)(c) to (f), are entitled to attend the meetings of the Management Board
            without voting rights.


                                                  Article 82
                                     Voting of the Management Board

The Management Board shall adopt rules of procedure for voting, including the conditions for a
member to vote on behalf of another member. The Management Board shall act by a
two-thirds majority of all members with the right to vote.


                                                  Article 83
                               Duties and powers of the Executive Director

1.          The Agency shall be managed by its Executive Director, who shall perform his duties in
            the interests of the Community, and independently of any specific interests.

2.          The Executive Director shall be the legal representative of the Agency. He shall be
            responsible for:

            (a)   the day-to-day administration of the Agency;

            (b)   managing all the Agency resources necessary for carrying out its tasks;

            (c)   ensuring that the time-limits laid down in Community legislation for the adoption of
                  opinions by the Agency are complied with;
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                   L 396/183


         (d)   ensuring appropriate and timely coordination between the Committees and the
               Forum;

         (e)   concluding and managing necessary contracts with service providers;

         (f)   the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and the implementation
               of the budget of the Agency pursuant to Articles 96 and 97;

         (g)   all staff matters;

         (h)   providing the secretariat for the Management Board;

         (i)   preparing draft opinions of the Management Board concerning the proposed rules of
               procedure of the Committees and of the Forum;

         (j)   making arrangements, upon request from the Management Board, for the execution
               of any further function(s) (within the remit of Article 77) allotted to the Agency by
               delegation from the Commission;

         (k)   establishing and maintaining a regular dialogue with the European Parliament;

         (l)   determining the terms and conditions for use of software packages;

         (m) rectifying a decision made by the Agency following an appeal and after consulting
               the Chairman of the Board of Appeal.
L 396/184          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


3.          Each year, the Executive Director shall submit the following to the Management Board for
            approval:

            (a)   a draft report covering the activities of the Agency in the previous year, including
                  information about the number of registration dossiers received, the number of
                  substances evaluated, the number of applications for authorisation received, the
                  number of proposals for restriction received by the Agency and opined upon, the
                  time taken for completion of the associated procedures, and the substances
                  authorised, dossiers rejected, substances restricted; complaints received and the
                  action taken; an overview of the activities of the Forum;

            (b)   a draft work-programme for the coming year;

            (c)   the draft annual accounts;

            (d)   the draft forecast budget for the coming year;

            (e)   a draft multi-annual work programme.

            The Executive Director shall, following approval by the Management Board, forward the
            work programme for the coming year and the multi-annual work programme to the
            Member States, the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission, and shall have
            them published.

            The Executive Director shall, following approval by the Management Board, forward the
            Agency's general report to the Member States, the European Parliament, the Council, the
            Commission, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Court of Auditors,
            and shall have it published.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                    L 396/185



                                                Article 84
                                 Appointment of the Executive Director

1.       The Executive Director of the Agency shall be appointed by the Management Board on the
         basis of a list of candidates proposed by the Commission following a call for expressions
         of interest published in the Official Journal of the European Union and in other periodicals
         or on Internet sites.

         The Executive Director shall be appointed on the grounds of merit and documented
         administrative and management skills, as well as his relevant experience in the fields of
         chemical safety or regulation. The Management Board shall take its decision by a
         two-thirds majority of all members with a right to vote.

         Power to dismiss the Executive Director shall lie with the Management Board, in
         accordance with the same procedure.

         Before being appointed, the candidate selected by the Management Board shall be invited
         as soon as possible to make a statement before the European Parliament and to answer
         questions from Members of Parliament.

2.       The term of the office of the Executive Director shall be five 5 years. It may be prolonged
         by the Management Board once for another period of up to five years.
L 396/186          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006



                                                  Article 85
                                     Establishment of the Committees

1.          Each Member State may nominate candidates to membership of the Committee for Risk
            Assessment. The Executive Director shall establish a list of the nominees, which shall be
            published on the Agency's website, without prejudice to Article 88(1). The Management
            Board shall appoint the members of the Committee from this list, including at least one
            member but not more than two from the nominees of each Member State that has
            nominated candidates. Members shall be appointed for their role and experience in
            performing the tasks specified in Article 77(3).

2.          Each Member State may nominate candidates to membership of the Committee for
            Socio-economic Analysis. The Executive Director shall establish a list of the nominees,
            which shall be published on the Agency's website, without prejudice to Article 88(1). The
            Management Board shall appoint the members of the Committee from this list, including at
            least one member but not more than two from the nominees of each Member State that has
            nominated candidates. Members shall be appointed for their role and experience in
            performing the tasks specified in Article 77(3).

3.          Each Member State shall appoint one member to the Member State Committee.

4.          The Committees shall aim to have a broad range of relevant expertise among their
            members. To this end each Committee may co-opt a maximum of five additional members
            chosen on the basis of their specific competence.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                    L 396/187


         Members of the Committees shall be appointed for a term of three years which shall be
         renewable.

         The members of the Management Board may not be members of the Committees.

         The members of each Committee may be accompanied by advisers on scientific, technical
         or regulatory matters.

         The Executive Director or his representative and representatives of the Commission shall
         be entitled to attend all the meetings of the Committees and working groups convened by
         the Agency or its committees as observers. Stakeholders may also be invited to attend
         meetings as observers, as appropriate, at the request of the Committee members, or the
         Management Board.

5.       The members of each Committee appointed following nomination by a Member State shall
         ensure that there is appropriate coordination between the tasks of the Agency and the work
         of their Member State competent authority.

6.       The members of the Committees shall be supported by the scientific and technical
         resources available to the Member States. To this end, Member States shall provide
         adequate scientific and technical resources to the members of the Committees that they
         have nominated. Each Member State competent authority shall facilitate the activities of
         the Committees and their working groups.

7.       The Member States shall refrain from giving the members of the Committee for Risk
         Assessment or of the Committee for Socio-Economic Analysis, or their scientific and
         technical advisers and experts, any instruction which is incompatible with the individual
         tasks of those persons or with the tasks, responsibilities and independence of the Agency.
L 396/188            EN              Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


8.          When preparing an opinion, each Committee shall use its best endeavours to reach a
            consensus. If such a consensus cannot be reached, the opinion shall consist of the position
            of the majority of members, including their grounds. The minority position(s), including
            their grounds, shall also be published.

9.          Each Committee shall draft a proposal for its own rules of procedure, to be approved by
            the Management Board, within six months of the Committees first being appointed.

            These rules shall in particular lay down the procedures for replacing members, the
            procedures for delegating certain tasks to working groups, the creation of working groups
            and the establishment of a procedure for the urgent adoption of opinions. The Chairman of
            each Committee shall be an employee of the Agency.


                                                  Article 86
                                        Establishment of the Forum

1.          Each Member State shall appoint, for a three-year term, which shall be renewable, one
            member to the Forum. Members shall be chosen for their role and experience in
            enforcement of chemicals legislation and shall maintain relevant contacts with the Member
            State competent authorities.

            The Forum shall aim to have a broad range of relevant expertise among its members. To
            this end the Forum may coopt a maximum of five additional members chosen on the basis
            of their specific competence. These members shall be appointed for a term of three years,
            which shall be renewable. Members of the Management Board may not be members of the
            Forum.
30.12.2006         EN             Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/189


         The members of the Forum may be accompanied by scientific and technical advisers.

         The Executive Director of the Agency or his representative and representatives of the
         Commission shall be entitled to attend all the meetings of the Forum and its working
         groups. Stakeholders may also be invited to attend meetings as observers, as appropriate, at
         the request of Forum members, or the Management Board.

2.       The members of the Forum appointed by a Member State shall ensure that there is
         appropriate coordination between the tasks of the Forum and the work of their Member
         State competent authority.

3.       The members of the Forum shall be supported by the scientific and technical resources
         available to the competent authorities of the Member States. Each Member State
         competent authority shall facilitate the activities of the Forum and its working groups. The
         Member States shall refrain from giving the Forum members, or their scientific and
         technical advisers and experts any instruction which is incompatible with the individual
         tasks of those persons or with the tasks and responsibilities of the Forum.

4.       The Forum shall draft a proposal for its own rules of procedure, to be adopted by the
         Management Board, within six months of the Forum first being appointed.

         These rules shall in particular lay down the procedures for appointing and replacing the
         Chairman, replacing members and the procedures for delegating certain tasks to working
         groups.
L 396/190          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006



                                                   Article 87
                               Rapporteurs of Committees and use of experts

1.          Where, in accordance with Article 77, a Committee is required to provide an opinion or
            consider whether a Member State dossier conforms with the requirements of Annex XV, it
            shall appoint one of its members as a rapporteur. The Committee concerned may appoint a
            second member to act as co-rapporteur. For each case, rapporteurs and co-rapporteurs shall
            undertake to act in the interests of the Community and shall make a declaration of
            commitment to fulfil their duties and a declaration of interests in writing. A member of a
            Committee shall not be appointed rapporteur for a particular case if he indicates any
            interest that might be prejudicial to the independent consideration of that case. The
            Committee concerned may replace the rapporteur or co-rapporteur by another one of its
            members at any time, if, for example, they are unable to fulfil their duties within the
            prescribed time limits, or if a potentially prejudicial interest comes to light.

2.          Member States shall transmit to the Agency the names of experts with proven experience
            in the tasks required by Article 77, who would be available to serve on working groups of
            the Committees, together with an indication of their qualifications and specific areas of
            expertise.

            The Agency shall keep an up-to-date list of experts. The list shall include the experts
            referred to in the first subparagraph and other experts identified directly by the Secretariat.
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/191


3.       The provision of services by Committee members or any expert serving on a working
         group of the Committees or Forum, or performing any other task for the Agency shall be
         governed by a written contract between the Agency and the person concerned, or where
         appropriate between the Agency and the employer of the person concerned.

         The person concerned, or his employer, shall be remunerated by the Agency in accordance
         with a scale of fees to be included in the financial arrangements established by the
         Management Board. Where the person concerned fails to fulfil his duties, the Executive
         Director has the right to terminate or suspend the contract or withhold remuneration.

4.       The provision of services for which there are several potential providers may require a call
         for an expression of interest:

         (a)   if the scientific and technical context allows; and

         (b)   if it is compatible with the duties of the Agency, in particular the need to provide a
               high level of protection of human health and the environment.

         The Management Board shall adopt the appropriate procedures on a proposal from the
         Executive Director.

5.       The Agency may use the services of experts for the discharge of other specific tasks for
         which it is responsible.
L 396/192          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006



                                                  Article 88
                                        Qualification and interests

1.          The membership of the Committees and of the Forum shall be made public. Individual
            members may request that their names not be made public if they believe that such
            publication could place them at risk. The Executive Director shall decide whether to agree
            to such requests. When each appointment is published, the professional qualifications of
            each member shall be specified.

2.          Members of the Management Board, the Executive Director and members of the
            Committees and of the Forum shall make a declaration of commitment to fulfil their duties
            and a declaration of interests which could be considered to be prejudicial to their
            independence. These declarations shall be made annually in writing and, without prejudice
            to paragraph 1, be entered in a register held by the Agency which is accessible to the
            public, on request, at the Agency's offices.

3.          At each of their meetings, members of the Management Board, the Executive Director,
            members of the Committees and of the Forum and any experts participating in the meeting
            shall declare any interests which could be considered to be prejudicial to their
            independence with respect to any points on the agenda. Anyone declaring such interests
            shall not participate in any voting on the relevant agenda point.


                                                  Article 89
                                   Establishment of the Board of Appeal

1.          The Board of Appeal shall consist of a Chairman and two other members.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/193


2.       The Chairman and the two members shall have alternates who shall represent them in their
         absence.

3.       The Chairman, the other members and the alternates shall be appointed by the
         Management Board on the basis of a list of candidates proposed by the Commission
         following a call for expressions of interest published in the Official Journal of the
         European Union and in other periodicals or on Internet sites. They shall be appointed on
         the basis of their relevant experience and expertise in the field of chemical safety, natural
         sciences or regulatory and judicial procedures from a list of qualified candidates adopted
         by the Commission.

         The Management Board may appoint additional members and their alternates, on
         recommendation by the Executive Director, following the same procedure, if this is
         necessary to ensure that the appeals can be processed at a satisfactory rate.

4.       The qualifications required for the members of the Board of Appeal shall be determined by
         the Commission in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 133(3).

5.       The Chairman and the members shall have equal voting rights.


                                                Article 90
                                   Members of the Board of Appeal

1.       The term of office of the members of the Board of Appeal, including the Chairman and the
         alternates shall be five years. It may be prolonged once.
L 396/194             EN              Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


2.          The members of the Board of Appeal shall be independent. In making their decisions they
            shall not be bound by any instructions.

3.          The members of the Board of Appeal may not perform any other duties in the Agency.

4.          The members of the Board of Appeal may not be removed either from office or from the
            list during their respective terms, unless there are serious grounds for such removal and the
            Commission, after obtaining the opinion of the Management Board, takes a decision to this
            effect.

5.          Members of the Board of Appeal may not take part in any appeal proceedings if they have
            any personal interest therein, or if they have previously been involved as representatives of
            one of the parties to the proceedings, or if they participated in the decision under appeal.

6.          If a member of the Board of Appeal considers for reasons mentioned in paragraph 5 that he
            must not take part in a specific appeal proceedings, he shall inform the Board of Appeal
            accordingly. Members of the Board may be objected to by any party to the appeal
            proceedings on any of the grounds mentioned in paragraph 5, or if suspected of partiality.
            No objection may be based on the nationality of members.

7.          The Board of Appeal shall decide as to the action to be taken in the cases specified in
            paragraphs 5 and 6 without the participation of the member concerned. For the purposes of
            taking this decision, the member concerned shall be replaced on the Board of Appeal by an
            alternate.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/195



                                               Article 91
                                     Decisions subject to appeal

1.       An appeal may be brought against decisions of the Agency taken pursuant to Article 9,
         Article 20, Article 27(6), Article 30(2) and (3) and Article 51.

2.       An appeal lodged pursuant to paragraph 1 shall have suspensive effect.


                                               Article 92
                        Persons entitled to appeal, time-limits, fees and form

1.       Any natural or legal person may appeal against a decision addressed to that person, or
         against a decision which, although addressed to another person, is of direct and individual
         concern to the former.

2.       The appeal, together with the statements of the grounds thereof, shall be filed in writing to
         the Agency within three months of the notification of the decision to the person concerned,
         or in the absence thereof, of the day on which it became known to the latter, unless
         otherwise provided in this Regulation.

3.       A fee may be payable by persons bringing an appeal against an Agency decision, in
         accordance with Title IX.
L 396/196          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006



                                                  Article 93
                                   Examination and decisions on appeal

1.          If, after consultation with the Chairman of the Board of Appeal, the Executive Director
            considers the appeal to be admissible and well founded he may rectify the decision within
            30 days of the appeal being filed in accordance with Article 92(2).

2.          In cases other than those referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Chairman of the
            Board of Appeal shall examine whether the appeal is admissible within 30 days of the
            appeal being filed in accordance with Article 92(2). In the affirmative, the appeal shall be
            remitted to the Board of Appeal for examination of the grounds. Parties to the appeal
            proceedings shall be entitled to make an oral presentation during the procedure.

3.          The Board of Appeal may exercise any power which lies within the competence of the
            Agency or remit the case to the competent body of the Agency for further action.

4.          The procedures for the Board of Appeal shall be determined by the Commission in
            accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 133(3).

                                                  Article 94
                        Actions before the Court of First Instance and the Court of Justice

1.          An action may be brought before the Court of First Instance or the Court of Justice, in
            accordance with Article 230 of the Treaty, contesting a decision taken by the Board of
            Appeal or, in cases where no right of appeal lies before the Board, by the Agency.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/197


2.       Should the Agency fail to take a decision, proceedings for failure to act may be brought
         before the Court of First Instance or the Court of Justice in accordance with Article 232 of
         the Treaty.

3.       The Agency shall be required to take the necessary measures to comply with the judgment
         of the Court of First Instance or the Court of Justice.


                                                Article 95
                                Conflicts of opinion with other bodies

1.       The Agency shall take care to ensure early identification of potential sources of conflict
         between its opinions and those of other bodies established under Community law,
         including Community Agencies, carrying out a similar task in relation to issues of common
         concern.

2.       Where the Agency identifies a potential source of conflict, it shall contact the body
         concerned in order to ensure that any relevant scientific or technical information is shared
         and to identify the scientific or technical points which are potentially contentious.

3.       Where there is a fundamental conflict over scientific or technical points and the body
         concerned is a Community Agency or a scientific committee, the Agency and the body
         concerned shall work together either to solve the conflict or to submit a joint document to
         the Commission clarifying the scientific and/or technical points of conflict.
L 396/198          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006



                                                   Article 96
                                         The budget of the Agency

1.          The revenues of the Agency shall consist of:

            (a)   a subsidy from the Community, entered in the general budget of the European
                  Communities (Commission Section);

            (b)   the fees paid by undertakings;

            (c)   any voluntary contribution from the Member States.

2.          The expenditure of the Agency shall include the staff, administrative, infrastructure and
            operational expenses.

3.          By 15 February of each year at the latest, the Executive Director shall draw up a
            preliminary draft budget covering the operational expenditure and the programme of work
            anticipated for the following financial year, and shall forward this preliminary draft to the
            Management Board together with an establishment plan accompanied by a provisional list
            of posts.

4.          Revenue and expenditure shall be in balance.

5.          Each year the Management Board, on the basis of a draft drawn up by the Executive
            Director, shall produce an estimate of revenue and expenditure for the Agency for the
            following financial year. This estimate, which shall include a draft establishment plan,
            shall be forwarded by the Management Board to the Commission by 31 March at the latest.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/199


6.       The estimate shall be forwarded by the Commission to the European Parliament and the
         Council (hereinafter referred to as "the budgetary authority") together with the preliminary
         draft budget of the European Communities.

7.       On the basis of the estimate, the Commission shall enter in the preliminary draft budget of
         the European Communities the estimates it considers necessary for the establishment plan
         and the amount of the subsidy to be charged to the general budget, which it shall place
         before the budgetary authority in accordance with Article 272 of the Treaty.

8.       The budgetary authority shall authorise the appropriations for the subsidy to the Agency.

         The budgetary authority shall adopt the establishment plan for the Agency.

9.       The budget of the Agency shall be adopted by the Management Board. It shall become
         final following final adoption of the general budget of the European Communities. Where
         appropriate, it shall be adjusted accordingly.

10.      Any modification to the budget, including the establishment plan, shall follow the
         procedure referred to above.

11.      The Management Board shall, without delay, notify the budgetary authority of its intention
         to implement any project which may have significant financial implications for the funding
         of its budget, in particular any projects relating to property such as the rental or purchase of
         buildings. It shall inform the Commission thereof.

         Where a branch of the budgetary authority has notified its intention to deliver an opinion, it
         shall forward its opinion to the Management Board within a period of six weeks from the
         date of notification of the project.
L 396/200          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006



                                                  Article 97
                               Implementation of the budget of the Agency

1.          The Executive Director shall perform the duties of authorising officer and shall implement
            the Agency's budget.

2.          Monitoring of the commitment and payment of all the Agency's expenditure and of the
            establishment and recovery of all the Agency's revenue shall be carried out by the
            Accounting Officer of the Agency.

3.          By 1 March at the latest following each financial year, the Agency's accounting officer
            shall communicate the provisional accounts to the Commission's accounting officer
            together with a report on the budgetary and financial management for that financial year.
            The Commission's accounting officer shall consolidate the provisional accounts of the
            institutions and decentralised bodies in accordance with Article 128 of
            Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/2002.

4.          By 31 March at the latest following each financial year, the Commission's accounting
            officer shall forward the Agency's provisional accounts to the Court of Auditors, together
            with a report on the budgetary and financial management for that financial year. The report
            on the budgetary and financial management for that financial year shall also be forwarded
            to the European Parliament and the Council.
30.12.2006      EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                    L 396/201


5.       On receipt of the Court of Auditors' observations on the Agency's provisional accounts,
         pursuant to Article 129 of Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/2002, the Executive
         Director shall draw up the Agency's final accounts under his own responsibility and
         forward them to the Management Board for an opinion.

6.       The Management Board shall deliver an opinion on the Agency's final accounts.

7.       By 1 July of the following year at the latest, the Executive Director shall send the final
         accounts, together with the opinion of the Management Board, to the European Parliament,
         the Council, the Commission and the Court of Auditors.

8.       The final accounts shall be published.

9.       The Executive Director shall send the Court of Auditors a reply to its observations by
         30 September at the latest. He shall also send this reply to the Management Board.

10.      The European Parliament, upon a recommendation from the Council, shall, before 30 April
         of year N + 2, give a discharge to the Executive Director in respect of the implementation
         of the budget for year N.


                                                  Article 98
                                              Combating fraud

1.       In order to combat fraud, corruption and other unlawful activities, the provisions of
         Regulation (EC) No 1073/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
         25 May 1999 concerning investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud
         Office (OLAF)1 shall apply without restrictions to the Agency.




1
       OJ L 136, 31.5.1999, p. 1.
L 396/202            EN               Official Journal of the European Union                   30.12.2006


2.          The Agency shall be bound by the Interinstitutional Agreement of 25 May 1999 between
            the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the Commission of the
            European Communities concerning internal investigations by the European Anti-Fraud
            Office (OLAF)1 and shall issue, without delay, the appropriate provisions applicable to all
            of its staff.

3.          The decisions concerning funding and the implementing agreements and instruments
            resulting from them shall explicitly stipulate that the Court of Auditors and OLAF may
            carry out, if necessary, on-the-spot checks of the recipients of the Agency's funding and the
            agents responsible for allocating it.


                                                    Article 99
                                                Financial rules

The financial rules applicable to the Agency shall be adopted by the Management Board after the
Commission has been consulted. They may not depart from Regulation (EC, Euratom)
No 2343/2002 unless specifically necessary for the Agency's operation and with the Commission's
prior consent.




1
       OJ L 136, 31.5.1999, p. 15.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/203



                                               Article 100
                                   Legal personality of the Agency

1.       The Agency shall be a body of the Community and shall have legal personality. In each
         Member State it shall enjoy the most extensive legal capacity accorded to legal persons
         under their laws. In particular it may acquire and dispose of movable and immovable
         property and may be a party to legal proceedings.

2.       The Agency shall be represented by its Executive Director.


                                               Article 101
                                        Liability of the Agency

1.       The contractual liability of the Agency shall be governed by the law applicable to the
         contract in question. The Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction pursuant to any arbitration
         clause contained in a contract concluded by the Agency.

2.       In the case of non-contractual liability, the Agency shall, in accordance with the general
         principles common to the laws of the Member States, make good any damage caused by it
         or by its servants in the performance of their duties.

         The Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction in any dispute relating to compensation for
         such damages.
L 396/204          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


3.          The personal financial and disciplinary liability of its servants towards the Agency shall be
            governed by the relevant rules applying to the staff of the Agency.


                                                 Article 102
                                 Privileges and immunities of the Agency

The Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Communities shall apply to the
Agency.


                                                 Article 103
                                         Staff rules and regulations

1.          The staff of the Agency shall be subject to the Regulations and Rules applicable to officials
            and other servants of the European Communities. In respect of its staff, the Agency shall
            exercise the powers which have been devolved to the appointing authority.

2.          The Management Board shall, in agreement with the Commission, adopt the necessary
            implementing provisions.

3.          The Agency's staff shall consist of officials assigned or seconded by the Commission or
            Member States on a temporary basis and of other servants recruited by the Agency as
            necessary to carry out its tasks. The Agency shall recruit its personnel on the basis of a
            staffing plan to be included in the multi-annual work programme referred to in
            Article 78(d).
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/205



                                              Article 104
                                              Languages

1.       Regulation No 1 of 15 April 1958 determining the languages to be used in the European
         Economic Community1 shall apply to the Agency.

2.       The translation services required for the functioning of the Agency shall be provided by the
         Translation Centre of the bodies of the European Union.


                                              Article 105
                                        Duty of confidentiality

Members of the Management Board, members of the Committees and of the Forum, experts and
officials and other servants of the Agency, shall be required, even after their duties have ceased, not
to disclose information of the kind covered by the duty of professional secrecy.


                                              Article 106
                                   Participation of third countries

The Management Board may, in agreement with the relevant Committee or the Forum, invite
representatives of third countries to participate in the work of the Agency.




1
       OJ 17, 6.10.1958, p. 385. Regulation as last amended by Council Regulation (EC)
       No 920/2005 (OJ L 156, 18.6.2005, p. 3).
L 396/206        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006



                                               Article 107
                             Participation of international organisations

The Management Board may, in agreement with the relevant Committee or the Forum, invite
representatives of international organisations with interests in the field of chemicals regulation to
participate as observers in the work of the Agency.


                                               Article 108
                               Contacts with stakeholder organisations

The Management Board shall, in agreement with the Commission, develop appropriate contacts
between the Agency and relevant stakeholder organisations.


                                               Article 109
                                         Rules on transparency

To ensure transparency, the Management Board shall, on the basis of a proposal by the Executive
Director and in agreement with the Commission, adopt rules to ensure the availability to the public
of regulatory, scientific or technical information concerning the safety of substances on their own,
in preparations or in articles which is not of a confidential nature.
30.12.2006       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                    L 396/207



                                              Article 110
                             Relations with relevant Community bodies

1.       The Agency shall cooperate with other Community bodies to ensure mutual support in the
         accomplishment of their respective tasks in particular to avoid duplication of work.

2.       The Executive Director, having consulted the Committee on Risk Assessment and the
         European Food Safety Authority, shall establish rules of procedure concerning substances
         for which an opinion has been sought in a food safety context. These rules of procedure
         shall be adopted by the Management Board, in agreement with the Commission.

         This Title shall not otherwise affect the competences vested in the European Food Safety
         Authority.

3.       This Title shall not affect the competences vested in the European Medicines Agency.

4.       The Executive Director, having consulted the Committee on Risk Assessment, the
         Committee on Socio-economic Analysis and the Advisory Committee on Safety, Hygiene
         and Health Protection at Work, shall establish rules of procedure concerning worker
         protection issues. These rules of procedure shall be adopted by the Management Board, in
         agreement with the Commission.

         This Title shall not affect the competences vested in the Advisory Committee on Safety,
         Hygiene and Health Protection at Work and the European Agency for Health and Safety at
         Work.
L 396/208          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006



                                                  Article 111
                                   Formats and software for submission
                                        of information to the Agency

The Agency shall specify formats and make them available free of charge, and software packages
and make them available on its website for any submissions to the Agency. Member States,
manufactures, importers, distributors or downstream users shall use these formats and packages in
their submissions to the Agency pursuant to this Regulation. In particular, the Agency shall make
available software tools to facilitate the submission of all information relating to substances
registered in accordance with Article 12(1).

For the purposes of registration, the format of the technical dossier referred to in Article 10(a) shall
be IUCLID. The Agency shall coordinate the further development of this format with the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development to ensure maximum harmonisation.


                                                  TITLE XI
              CLASSIFICATION AND LABELLING INVENTORY


                                                  Article 112
                                                    Scope

This Title shall apply to:

(a)         substances subject to registration;
30.12.2006       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                          L 396/209


(b)      substances within the scope of Article 1 of Directive 67/548/EEC, which meet the criteria
         for classification as dangerous in accordance with that Directive, and which are placed on
         the market either on their own, or in a preparation above the concentration limits specified
         in Directive 1999/45/EC, where relevant, which results in the classification of the
         preparation as dangerous.


                                              Article 113
                                     Obligation to notify the Agency

1.       Any manufacturer, producer of articles or importer, or group of manufacturers or producers
         of articles or importers, who place on the market a substance within the scope of
         Article 112, shall notify to the Agency the following information in order for it to be
         included in the inventory in accordance with Article 114, unless submitted as part of the
         registration:

         (a)   the identity(ies) of the manufacturer(s), producer(s) of articles or importer(s)
               responsible for placing the substance(s) on the market as specified in section 1 of
               Annex VI;

         (b)   the identity of the substance(s) as specified in sections 2.1 to 2.3.4 of Annex VI;

         (c)   the hazard classification of the substance(s), resulting from the application of
               Articles 4 and 6 of Directive 67/548/EEC;
L 396/210          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


            (d)   the hazard label for the substance(s), resulting from the application of Article 23(c)
                  to (f), of Directive 67/548/EEC;

            (e)   specific concentration limits, where applicable, resulting from the application of
                  Article 4(4) of Directive 67/548/EEC and Articles 4 to 7 of Directive 1999/45/EC.

2.          Where the obligation under paragraph 1 results in different entries on the inventory for the
            same substance, the notifiers and registrants shall make every effort to come to an agreed
            entry to be included in the inventory.

3.          The information listed in paragraph 1 shall be updated by the notifier(s) whenever:

            (a)   any new scientific or technical information is generated which results in a change to
                  the classification and labelling of the substance;

            (b)   notifiers and registrants of differing entries for a single substance come to an agreed
                  entry in accordance with paragraph 2.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/211



                                               Article 114
                                Classification and labelling inventory

1.       A classification and labelling inventory, listing the information referred to in
         Article 113(1), both for information notified under Article 113(1) as well as for
         information submitted as part of a registration, shall be established and maintained by
         the Agency in the form of a database. The information in this database identified in
         Article 119(1) shall be publicly accessible. The Agency shall grant access to the other data
         on each substance in the inventory to the notifiers and registrants who have submitted
         information on that substance in accordance with Article 29(1).

         The Agency shall update the inventory when it receives updated information in accordance
         with Article 113(3).

2.       In addition to the information referred to in paragraph 1, the Agency shall record the
         following information, where appropriate, against each entry:

         (a)   whether, in respect of the entry, there is a harmonised classification and labelling at
               Community level by inclusion in Annex I of Directive 67/548/EEC;

         (b)   whether, in respect of the entry, it is a joint entry between registrants of the same
               substance as per Article 11(1);

         (c)   if the entry differs from another entry on the inventory for the same substance;

         (d)   the relevant registration number(s), if available.
L 396/212          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006



                                                 Article 115
                              Harmonisation of classification and labelling

1.          Harmonised classification and labelling at Community level shall, from 1 June 2007,
            normally be added to Annex I of Directive 67/548/EEC for classification of a substance as
            carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic for reproduction category 1, 2 or 3, or as a respiratory
            sensitiser. Harmonised classification and labelling for other effects may also be added to
            Annex I of Directive 67/548/EEC on a case-by-case basis if justification is provided
            demonstrating the need for action at Community level. To this end, Member State
            competent authorities may submit proposals to the Agency for harmonised classification
            and labelling in accordance with Annex XV.

2.          The Committee for Risk Assessment shall adopt an opinion on the proposal, giving parties
            concerned the opportunity to comment. The Agency shall forward this opinion and any
            comments to the Commission, which shall take a decision in accordance with Article 4(3)
            of Directive 67/548/EEC.


                                                 Article 116
                                        Transitional arrangements

The obligations set out in Article 113 shall apply from 1 December 2010.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/213


                                             TITLE XII
                                         INFORMATION



                                               Article 117
                                                Reporting

1.       Every five years, Member States shall submit to the Commission a report on the operation
         of this Regulation in their respective territories, including sections on evaluation and
         enforcement as described in Article 127.

         The first report shall be submitted by 1 June 2010.

2.       Every five years, the Agency shall submit to the Commission a report on the operation of
         this Regulation. The Agency shall include in its report information on the joint submission
         of information in accordance with Article 11 and an overview of the explanations given for
         submitting information separately.

         The first report shall be submitted by 1 June 2011.

3.       Every three years the Agency, in accordance with the objective of promoting non-animal
         testing methods, shall submit to the Commission a report on the status of implementation
         and use of non-animal test methods and testing strategies used to generate information on
         intrinsic properties and for risk assessment to meet the requirements of this Regulation.

         The first report shall be submitted by 1 June 2011.
L 396/214          EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                   30.12.2006


4.          Every five years, the Commission shall publish a general report on

            (a)   the experience acquired with the operation of this Regulation, including the
                  information referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 and

            (b)   the amount and distribution of funding made available by the Commission for the
                  development and evaluation of alternative test methods.

            The first report shall be published by 1 June 2012.


                                                    Article 118
                                              Access to information

1.          Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 shall apply to documents held by the Agency.

2.          Disclosure of the following information shall normally be deemed to undermine the
            protection of the commercial interests of the concerned person:

            (a)   details of the full composition of a preparation;

            (b)   without prejudice to Article 7(6) and Article 64(2), the precise use, function or
                  application of a substance or preparation, including information about its precise use
                  as an intermediate;

            (c)   the precise tonnage of the substance or preparation manufactured or placed on the
                  market;
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/215


         (d)   links between a manufacturer or importer and his distributors or downstream users.

         Where urgent action is essential to protect human health, safety or the environment, such
         as emergency situations, the Agency may disclose the information referred to in this
         paragraph.

3.       The Management Board shall adopt the practical arrangements for implementing
         Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001, including appeals or remedies necessary for reviewing a
         partial or full rejection of a confidentiality request, by 1 June 2008.

4.       Decisions taken by the Agency pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001
         may form the subject of a complaint to the Ombudsman or of an action before the Court of
         Justice, under the conditions laid down in Articles 195 and 230 of the Treaty respectively.


                                               Article 119
                                       Electronic public access

1.       The following information held by the Agency on substances whether on their own, in
         preparations or in articles, shall be made publicly available, free of charge, over the
         Internet in accordance with Article 77(2)(e):

         (a)   the name in the IUPAC Nomenclature, for dangerous substances within the meaning
               of Directive 67/548/EEC, without prejudice to paragraph 2(f) and (g);

         (b)   if applicable, the name of the substance as given in EINECS;
L 396/216          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


            (c)   the classification and labelling of the substance;

            (d)   physicochemical data concerning the substance and on pathways and environmental
                  fate;

            (e)   the result of each toxicological and ecotoxicological study;

            (f)   any derived no-effect level (DNEL) or predicted no-effect concentration (PNEC)
                  established in accordance with Annex I;

            (g)   the guidance on safe use provided in accordance with sections 4 and 5 of Annex VI;

            (h)   analytical methods if requested in accordance with Annexes IX or X which make it
                  possible to detect a dangerous substance when discharged into the environment as
                  well as to determine the direct exposure of humans.

2.          The following information on substances whether on their own, in preparations or in
            articles, shall be made publicly available, free of charge, over the Internet in accordance
            with Article 77(2)(e) except where a party submitting the information submits a
            justification in accordance with Article 10(a)(xi), accepted as valid by the Agency, as to
            why such publication is potentially harmful for the commercial interests of the registrant or
            any other party concerned:

            (a)   if essential to classification and labelling, the degree of purity of the substance and
                  the identity of impurities and/or additives which are known to be dangerous;
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/217


         (b)   the total tonnage band (i.e. 1-10 tonnes, 10-100 tonnes, 100-1 000 tonnes or over
               1 000 tonnes) within which a particular substance has been registered;

         (c)   the study summaries or robust study summaries of the information referred to in
               paragraph 1(d) and (e);

         (d)   information, other than that listed in paragraph 1, contained in the safety data sheet;

         (e)   the trade name(s) of the substance;

         (f)   the name in the IUPAC Nomenclature for non-phase-in substances which are
               dangerous within the meaning of Directive 67/548/EEC for a period of six years;

         (g)   the name in the IUPAC Nomenclature for dangerous substances within the meaning
               of Directive 67/548/EEC that are only used as one or more of the following:

               (i)    as an intermediate;

               (ii)   in scientific research and development;

               (iii) in product and process orientated research and development.
L 396/218          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006



                                                 Article 120
                    Cooperation with third countries and international organisations

Notwithstanding Articles 118 and 119, information received by the Agency under this Regulation
may be disclosed to any government or national authority of a third country or an international
organisation in accordance with an agreement concluded between the Community and the
third party concerned under Regulation (EC) No 304/2003 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 28 January 2003 concerning the export and import of dangerous chemicals1 or under
Article 181a (3) of the Treaty, provided that both the following conditions are met:

(a)         the purpose of the agreement is cooperation on the implementation or management of
            legislation concerning chemicals covered by this Regulation;

(b)         the third party protects the confidential information as mutually agreed.




1
       OJ L 63, 6.3.2003, p. 1. Regulation as last amended by Commission Regulation (EC)
       No 775/2004 (OJ L 123, 27.4.2004, p. 27).
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/219


                                             TITLE XIII
                                  COMPETENT AUTHORITIES



                                               Article 121
                                              Appointment

Member States shall appoint the competent authority or competent authorities responsible for
performing the tasks allotted to competent authorities under this Regulation and for cooperating
with the Commission and the Agency in the implementation of this Regulation. Member States
shall place adequate resources at the disposal of the competent authorities to enable them, in
conjunction with any other available resources, to fulfil their tasks under this Regulation in a timely
and effective manner.


                                               Article 122
                             Cooperation between competent authorities

The competent authorities shall cooperate with each other in the performance of their tasks under
this Regulation and shall give the competent authorities of other Member States all the necessary
and useful support to this end.
L 396/220        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006



                                               Article 123
                 Communication to the public of information on risks of substances

The competent authorities of the Member States shall inform the general public about the risks
arising from substances where this is considered necessary for the protection of human health or the
environment. The Agency, in consultation with competent authorities and stakeholders and drawing
as appropriate on relevant best practice, shall provide guidance for the communication of
information on the risks and safe use of chemical substances, on their own, in preparations or in
articles, with a view to coordinating Member States in these activities.


                                               Article 124
                                         Other responsibilities

Competent authorities shall submit electronically to the Agency any available information that they
hold on substances registered in accordance with Article 12(1) whose dossiers do not contain the
full information referred to in Annex VII, in particular whether enforcement or monitoring activities
have identified suspicions of risk. The competent authority shall update this information as
appropriate.

Member States shall establish national helpdesks to provide advice to manufacturers, importers,
downstream users and any other interested parties on their respective responsibilities and
obligations under this Regulation, in particular in relation to the registration of substances in
accordance with Article 12(1), in addition to the operational guidance documents provided by the
Agency under Article 77(2)(g).
30.12.2006       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/221


                                           TITLE XIV
                                     ENFORCEMENT


                                              Article 125
                                     Tasks of the Member States

Member States shall maintain a system of official controls and other activities as appropriate to the
circumstances.


                                              Article 126
                                    Penalties for non-compliance

Member States shall lay down the provisions on penalties applicable for infringement of the
provisions of this Regulation and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are
implemented. The penalties provided for must be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. The
Member States shall notify those provisions to the Commission no later than 1 December 2008 and
shall notify it without delay of any subsequent amendment affecting them.
L 396/222          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006



                                                 Article 127
                                                    Report

The report referred to in Article 117(1) shall, in relation to enforcement, include the results of the
official inspections, the monitoring carried out, the penalties provided for and the other measures
taken pursuant to Articles 125 and 126 during the previous reporting period. The common issues to
be covered in the reports shall be agreed by the Forum. The Commission shall make these reports
available to the Agency and the Forum.

                                                TITLE XV
                        TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS



                                                 Article 128
                                              Free movement

1.          Subject to paragraph 2, Member States shall not prohibit, restrict or impede the
            manufacturing, import, placing on the market or use of a substance, on its own, in a
            preparation or in an article, falling within the scope of this Regulation, which complies
            with this Regulation and, where appropriate, with Community acts adopted in
            implementation of this Regulation.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/223


2.       Nothing in this Regulation shall prevent Member States from maintaining or laying down
         national rules to protect workers, human health and the environment applying in cases
         where this Regulation does not harmonise the requirements on manufacture, placing on the
         market or use.


                                               Article 129
                                           Safeguard clause

1.       Where a Member State has justifiable grounds for believing that urgent action is essential
         to protect human health or the environment in respect of a substance, on its own, in a
         preparation or in an article, even if satisfying the requirements of this Regulation, it may
         take appropriate provisional measures. The Member State shall immediately inform the
         Commission, the Agency and the other Member States thereof, giving reasons for its
         decision and submitting the scientific or technical information on which the provisional
         measure is based.

2.       The Commission shall take a decision in accordance with the procedure referred to in
         Article 133(3) within 60 days of receipt of the information from the Member State. This
         decision shall either:

         (a)   authorise the provisional measure for a time period defined in the decision; or

         (b)   require the Member State to revoke the provisional measure.
L 396/224          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


3.          If, in the case of a decision as referred to in point (a) of paragraph 2, the provisional
            measure taken by the Member State consists in a restriction on the placing on the market or
            use of a substance, the Member State concerned shall initiate a Community restrictions
            procedure by submitting to the Agency a dossier, in accordance with Annex XV, within
            three months of the date of the Commission decision.

4.          In the case of a decision as referred to in point (a) of paragraph 2, the Commission shall
            consider whether this Regulation needs to be adapted.


                                                  Article 130
                                     Statement of reasons for decisions

The competent authorities, the Agency and the Commission shall state the reasons for all decisions
they take under this Regulation.


                                                  Article 131
                                         Amendments to the Annexes

The Annexes may be amended in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 133(4).
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/225



                                              Article 132
                                      Implementing legislation

The measures necessary to put the provisions of this Regulation efficiently into effect shall be
adopted in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 133(3).


                                              Article 133
                                        Committee procedure

1.       The Commission shall be assisted by a Committee.

2.       Where reference is made to this paragraph, Articles 3 and 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall
         apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof.

3.       Where reference is made to this paragraph, Articles 5 and 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall
         apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof.

         The period laid down in Article 5(6) of Decision 1999/468/EC shall be set at three months.

4.       Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5a (1) to (4), and Article 7 of
         Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof.

5.       The Committee shall adopt its Rules of Procedure.
L 396/226          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006



                                                 Article 134
                                Preparation of establishment of the Agency

1.          The Commission shall afford the necessary support towards the establishment of the
            Agency.

2.          For that purpose, until such time as the Executive Director takes up his duties following his
            appointment by the Management Board of the Agency in accordance with Article 84, the
            Commission, on behalf of the Agency, and using the budget provided for the latter, may

            (a)   appoint personnel, including a person who shall fulfil the administrative functions of
                  the Executive Director on an interim basis; and

            (b)   conclude other contracts.


                                                 Article 135
                           Transitional measures regarding notified substances

1.          The requests to notifiers to provide further information to the competent authority in
            accordance with Article 16(2) of Directive 67/548/EEC, shall be considered as decisions
            adopted in accordance with Article 51 of this Regulation.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/227


2.       The requests to a notifier to provide further information for a substance in accordance with
         Article 16(1) of Directive 67/548/EEC, shall be considered as decisions adopted in
         accordance with Article 52 of this Regulation.

         Such substance shall be regarded as being included in the Community rolling action plan in
         accordance with Article 44(2) of this Regulation and shall be regarded as being chosen in
         accordance with Article 45(2) of this Regulation by the Member State whose competent
         authority has requested further information in accordance with Article 7(2) and
         Article 16(1) of Directive 67/548/EEC.


                                              Article 136
                        Transitional measures regarding existing substances

1.       The requests to manufacturers and importers to submit information to the Commission
         made by a Commission Regulation in application of Article 10(2) of Regulation (EEC)
         No 793/93, shall be considered as decisions adopted in accordance with Article 52 of this
         Regulation.

         The competent authority for the substance shall be the competent authority from the
         Member State identified as rapporteur in accordance with Article 10(1) of
         Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and shall carry out the tasks of Article 46(3) and Article 48
         of this Regulation.
L 396/228          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


2.          The requests to manufacturers and importers to submit information to the Commission
            made by a Commission Regulation in application of Article 12(2) of Regulation (EEC)
            No 793/93, shall be considered as decisions adopted in accordance with Article 52 of this
            Regulation. The Agency shall identify the competent authority for the substance to carry
            out the tasks of Article 46(3) and Article 48 of this Regulation.

3.          A Member State whose rapporteur has not forwarded by 1 June 2008 the risk evaluation
            and, where appropriate, the strategy for limiting the risks, in accordance with Article 10(3)
            of Regulation (EEC) No 793/93, shall:

            (a)   document information on hazard and risk in accordance with Annex XV, Part B of
                  this Regulation;

            (b)   apply Article 69(4) of this Regulation on the basis of the information referred to in
                  point (a); and

            (c)   prepare a documentation of how it considers that any other risks identified would
                  need to be addressed by action other than an amendment of Annex XVII of this
                  Regulation.

            The information referred to above shall be submitted to the Agency by 1 December 2008.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/229



                                              Article 137
                            Transitional measures regarding restrictions

1.       By 1 June 2010, the Commission shall, if necessary, prepare a draft amendment to Annex
         XVII in accordance with either of the following:

         (a)   any risk evaluation and recommended strategy for limiting risks that has been
               adopted at Community level in accordance with Article 11 of Regulation (EEC)
               No 793/93 as far as it includes proposals for restrictions in accordance with
               Title VIII of this Regulation but for which a decision under Directive 76/769/EEC
               has not yet been taken;

         (b)   any proposal, which has been submitted to the relevant institutions but has
               not yet been adopted, concerning the introduction or the amendment of restrictions
               under Directive 76/769/EEC.

2.       Until 1 June 2010, any dossier referred to in Article 129(3) shall be submitted to the
         Commission. The Commission shall, if necessary, prepare a draft amendment to
         Annex XVII.

3.       Any amendment to the restrictions adopted under Directive 76/769/EEC from 1 June 2007
         shall be incorporated in Annex XVII with effect from 1 June 2009.
L 396/230          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006



                                                   Article 138
                                                    Review

1.          By 1 June 2019, the Commission shall carry out a review to assess whether or not to
            extend the application of the obligation to perform a chemical safety assessment and to
            document it in a chemical safety report to substances not covered by this obligation
            because they are not subject to registration or subject to registration but manufactured or
            imported in quantities of less than 10 tonnes per year. However, for substances meeting the
            criteria for classification as carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic for reproduction, category 1
            or 2, in accordance with Directive 67/548/EEC, the review shall be carried out by 1 June
            2014. When carrying out the review the Commission shall take into account all relevant
            factors, including:

            (a)   the costs for manufacturers and importers of drawing up the chemical safety reports;

            (b)   the distribution of costs between actors in the supply chain and the downstream user;

            (c)   the benefits for human health and the environment.

            On the basis of these reviews, the Commission may, if appropriate, present legislative
            proposals to extend this obligation.
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/231


2.       The Commission may present legislative proposals as soon as a practicable and
         cost-efficient way of selecting polymers for registration on the basis of sound technical and
         valid scientific criteria can be established, and after publishing a report on the following:

         (a)   the risks posed by polymers in comparison with other substances;

         (b)   the need, if any, to register certain types of polymer, taking account of
               competitiveness and innovation on the one hand and the protection of human health
               and the environment on the other.

3.       The report, referred to in Article 117(4), on the experience acquired with the operation of
         this Regulation shall include a review of the requirements relating to registration of
         substances manufactured or imported only in quantities starting at 1 tonne but less than
         10 tonnes per year per manufacturer or importer. On the basis of that review, the
         Commission may present legislative proposals to modify the information requirements for
         substances manufactured or imported in quantities of 1 tonne or more up to 10 tonnes
         per year per manufacturer or importer, taking into account the latest developments, for
         example in relation to alternative testing and (quantitative) structure-activity
         relationships ((Q)SARs).

4.       The Commission shall carry out a review of Annexes I, IV and V by 1 June 2008, with a
         view to proposing amendments, if appropriate, to them in accordance with the procedure
         referred to in Article 131.
L 396/232             EN             Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


5.          The Commission shall carry out a review of Annex XIII by 1 December 2008, to assess the
            adequacy of the criteria for identifying substances which are persistent, bioaccumulative
            and toxic or very persistent and very bioaccumulative, with a view to proposing an
            amendment to it, if appropriate, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article
            133(4).

6.          By 1 June 2012 the Commission shall carry out a review to assess whether or not to amend
            the scope of this Regulation to avoid overlaps with other relevant Community provisions.
            On the basis of that review, the Commission may, if appropriate, present a legislative
            proposal.

7.          By 1 June 2013 the Commission shall carry out a review to assess whether or not, taking
            into account latest developments in scientific knowledge, to extend the scope of Article
            60(3) to substances identified under Article 57(f) as having endocrine disrupting
            properties. On the basis of that review the Commission may, if appropriate, present
            legislative proposals.

8.          By 1 June 2019, the Commission shall carry out a review to assess whether or not to
            extend the scope of Article 33 to cover other dangerous substances, taking into account the
            practical experience in implementing that Article. On the basis of that review, the
            Commission may, if appropriate, present legislative proposals to extend that obligation.

9.          In accordance with the objective of promoting non-animal testing and the replacement,
            reduction or refinement of animal testing required under this Regulation, the Commission
            shall review the testing requirements of Section 8.7 of Annex VIII by 1 June 2019. On the
            basis of this review, while ensuring a high level of protection of health and the
            environment, the Commission may propose an amendment in accordance with the
            procedure referred to in Article 133(4).
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/233



                                              Article 139
                                                Repeals

Directive 91/155/EEC shall be repealed.

Directives 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC and Regulations (EEC) No 793/93 and (EC) No 1488/94
shall be repealed with effect from 1 June 2008.

Directive 93/67/EEC shall be repealed with effect from 1 August 2008.

Directive 76/769/EEC shall be repealed with effect from 1 June 2009.

References to the repealed acts shall be construed as references to this Regulation.


                                              Article 140
                                Amendment of Directive 1999/45/EC

Article 14 of Directive 1999/45/EC shall be deleted.


                                              Article 141
                                   Entry into force and application

1.       This Regulation shall enter into force on 1 June 2007.

2.       Titles II, III, V, VI, VII, XI and XII as well as Articles 128 and 136 shall apply from 1
         June 2008.
L 396/234          EN               Official Journal of the European Union                   30.12.2006


3.          Article 135 shall apply from 1 August 2008.

4.          Title VIII and Annex XVII shall apply from 1 June 2009.



This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States.

Done at Brussels, 18 December 2006.



For the European Parliament                     For the Council
The President                                   The President



J. BORRELL FONTELLES                            M. VANHANEN




                                                  ______
30.12.2006    EN            Official Journal of the European Union   L 396/235


                                  LIST OF ANNEXES

ANNEX I      GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ASSESSING SUBSTANCES AND PREPARING
             CHEMICAL SAFETY REPORTS

ANNEX II     GUIDE TO THE COMPILATION OF SAFETY DATA SHEETS

ANNEX III    CRITERIA FOR SUBSTANCES REGISTERED IN QUANTITIES BETWEEN
             1 AND 10 TONNES

ANNEX IV     EXEMPTIONS FROM THE OBLIGATION TO REGISTER IN ACCORDANCE
             WITH ARTICLE 2(7)(a)

ANNEX V      EXEMPTIONS FROM THE OBLIGATION TO REGISTER IN ACCORDANCE
             WITH ARTICLE 2(7)(b)

ANNEX VI     INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 10

ANNEX VII STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBSTANCES
             MANUFACTURED OR IMPORTED IN QUANTITIES OF 1 TONNE OR MORE

ANNEX VIII STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBSTANCES
             MANUFACTURED OR IMPORTED IN QUANTITIES OF 10 TONNES OR
             MORE
L 396/236    EN          Official Journal of the European Union   30.12.2006


ANNEX IX    STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBSTANCES
            MANUFACTURED OR IMPORTED IN QUANTITIES OF 100 TONNES OR
            MORE

ANNEX X     STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBSTANCES
            MANUFACTURED OR IMPORTED IN QUANTITIES OF 1 000 TONNES OR
            MORE

ANNEX XI    GENERAL RULES FOR ADAPTATION OF THE STANDARD TESTING
            REGIME SET OUT IN ANNEXES VII TO X

ANNEX XII GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR DOWNSTREAM USERS TO ASSESS
            SUBSTANCES AND PREPARE CHEMICAL SAFETY REPORTS

ANNEX XIII CRITERIA FOR THE IDENTIFICATION OF PERSISTENT,
            BIOACCUMULATIVE AND TOXIC SUBSTANCES, AND VERY PERSISTENT
            AND VERY BIOACCUMULATIVE SUBSTANCES

ANNEX XIV LIST OF SUBSTANCES SUBJECT TO AUTHORISATION

ANNEX XV DOSSIERS

ANNEX XVI SOCIO-ECONOMIC ANALYSIS

ANNEX XVII RESTRICTIONS ON THE MANUFACTURE, PLACING ON THE MARKET
            AND USE OF CERTAIN DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES, PREPARATIONS AND
            ARTICLES
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/237


                                               ANNEX I

                   GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ASSESSING SUBSTANCES
                       AND PREPARING CHEMICAL SAFETY REPORTS

0.       INTRODUCTION

0.1.     The purpose of this Annex is to set out how manufacturers and importers are to assess and
         document that the risks arising from the substance they manufacture or import are
         adequately controlled during manufacture and their own use(s) and that others further
         down the supply chain can adequately control the risks. This Annex shall also apply
         adapted as necessary to producers and importers of articles required to make a chemical
         safety assessment as part of a registration.

0.2.     The chemical safety assessment shall be prepared by one or more competent person(s) who
         have appropriate experience and received appropriate training, including refresher training.

0.3.     The chemical safety assessment of a manufacturer shall address the manufacture of a
         substance and all the identified uses. The chemical safety assessment of an importer shall
         address all identified uses. The chemical safety assessment shall consider the use of the
         substance on its own (including any major impurities and additives), in a preparation and
         in an article, as defined by the identified uses. The assessment shall consider all stages of
         the life-cycle of the substance resulting from the manufacture and identified uses. The
         chemical safety assessment shall be based on a comparison of the potential adverse effects
         of a substance with the known or reasonably foreseeable exposure of man and/or the
         environment to that substance taking into account implemented and recommended risk
         management measures and operational conditions.
L 396/238           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


0.4.        Substances whose physicochemical, toxicological and ecotoxicological properties are
            likely to be similar or follow a regular pattern as a result of structural similarity may be
            considered as a group, or "category" of substances. If the manufacturer or importer
            considers that the chemical safety assessment carried out for one substance is sufficient to
            assess and document that the risks arising from another substance or from a group or
            "category" of substances are adequately controlled then he can use that chemical safety
            assessment for the other substance or group or "category" of substances. The manufacturer
            or importer shall provide a justification for this.

0.5.        The chemical safety assessment shall be based on the information on the substance
            contained in the technical dossier and on other available and relevant information.
            Manufacturers or importers submitting a proposal for testing in accordance with
            Annexes IX and X shall record this under the relevant heading of the chemical safety
            report. Available information from assessments carried out under other international and
            national programmes shall be included. Where available and appropriate, an assessment
            carried out under Community legislation (e.g. risk assessments completed under
            Regulation (EEC) No 793/93) shall be taken into account in the development of, and
            reflected in, the chemical safety report. Deviations from such assessments shall be
            justified.

            Thus the information to be considered includes information related to the hazards of the
            substance, the exposure arising from the manufacture or import, the identified uses of the
            substance, operational conditions and risk management measures applied or recommended
            to downstream users to be taken into account.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/239

         In accordance with section 3 of Annex XI in some cases, it may not be necessary to
         generate missing information, because risk management measures and operational
         conditions which are necessary to control a well-characterised risk may also be sufficient
         to control other potential risks, which will not therefore need to be characterised precisely.


         If the manufacturer or importer considers that further information is necessary for
         producing his chemical safety report and that this information can only be obtained by
         performing tests in accordance with Annex IX or X, he shall submit a proposal for a testing
         strategy, explaining why he considers that additional information is necessary and record
         this in the chemical safety report under the appropriate heading. While waiting for results
         of further testing, he shall record in his chemical safety report, and include in the exposure
         scenario developed, the interim risk management measures that he has put in place and
         those he recommends to downstream users intended to manage the risks being explored.

0.6.     A chemical safety assessment performed by a manufacturer or an importer for a substance
         shall include the following steps in accordance with the respective sections of this Annex:

         1.    Human health hazard assessment

         2.    Human health hazard assessment of physicochemical properties

         3.    Environmental hazard assessment

         4.    PBT and vPvB assessment
L 396/240          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


            If as a result of steps 1 to 4 the manufacturer or importer concludes that the substance or
            the preparation meets the criteria for classification as dangerous according to
            Directive 67/548/EEC or Directive 1999/45/EC or is assessed to be a PBT or vPvB, the
            chemical safety assessment shall also consider the following steps:

            5.    Exposure assessment

                  5.1. The generation of exposure scenario(s) or the generation of relevant use and
                        exposure categories if appropriate

                  5.2. Exposure estimation

            6.    Risk characterisation

            A summary of all the relevant information used in addressing the points above, shall be
            presented under the relevant heading of the Chemical Safety Report (Section 7).

0.7.        The main element of the exposure part of the chemical safety report is the description of
            the exposure scenario(s) implemented for the manufacturer's production, the manufacturer
            or importer's own use, and those recommended by the manufacturer or importer to be
            implemented for the identified use(s).

            An exposure scenario is the set of conditions that describe how the substance is
            manufactured or used during its life-cycle and how the manufacturer or importer controls,
            or recommends downstream users to control, exposures of humans and the environment.
            These sets of conditions contain a description of both the risk management measures and
            operational conditions which the manufacturer or importer has implemented or
            recommends to be implemented by downstream users.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/241


         If the substance is placed on the market, the relevant exposure scenario(s), including the
         risk management measures and operational conditions shall be included in an annex to the
         safety data sheet in accordance with Annex II.

0.8.     The level of detail required in describing an exposure scenario will vary substantially from
         case to case, depending on the use of a substance, its hazardous properties and the amount
         of information available to the manufacturer or importer. Exposure scenarios may describe
         the appropriate risk management measures for several individual processes or uses of a
         substance. An exposure scenario may thereby cover a large range of processes or uses.
         Exposure scenarios covering a wide range of processes or uses may be referred to as
         Exposure Categories. Further mention of Exposure Scenario in this Annex and Annex II
         includes Exposure Categories if they are developed.

0.9.     Where information is not necessary in accordance with Annex XI, this fact shall be stated
         under the appropriate heading of the chemical safety report and a reference shall be made
         to the justification in the technical dossier. The fact that no information is required shall
         also be stated in the safety data sheet.

0.10.    In relation to particular effects, such as ozone depletion, photochemical ozone creation
         potential, strong odour and tainting, for which the procedures set out in sections 1 to 6 are
         impracticable, the risks associated with such effects shall be assessed on a case-by-case
         basis and the manufacturer or importer shall include a full description and justification of
         such assessments in the chemical safety report and summarised in the safety data sheet.
L 396/242          EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


0.11.       When assessing the risk of the use of one or more substances incorporated into a special
            preparation (for instance alloys), the way the constituent substances are bonded in the
            chemical matrix shall be taken into account.

0.12.       Where the methodology described in this Annex is not appropriate, details of alternative
            methodology used shall be explained and justified in the chemical safety report.

0.13.       Part A of the chemical safety report shall include a declaration that the risk management
            measures outlined in the relevant exposure scenarios for the manufacturer's or importer's
            own use(s) are implemented by the manufacturer or importer and that those exposure
            scenarios for the identified uses are communicated to distributors and downstream users in
            the safety data sheet(s).

1.          HUMAN HEALTH HAZARD ASSESSMENT

1.0.        Introduction

1.0.1.      The objective of the human health hazard assessment shall be:

            –     to determine the classification and labelling of a substance in accordance with
                  Directive 67/548/EEC; and

            –     to derive levels of exposure to the substance above which humans should not be
                  exposed. This level of exposure is known as the Derived No-Effect Level (DNEL).
30.12.2006         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/243


1.0.2.   The human health hazard assessment shall consider the toxicokinetic profile
         (i.e. absorption, metabolism, distribution and elimination) of the substance and the
         following groups of effects, (1) acute effects (acute toxicity, irritation and corrosivity),
         (2) sensitisation, (3) repeated dose toxicity and (4) CMR effects (carcinogenity,
         mutagenicity and toxicity for reproduction). Based on all the available information, other
         effects shall be considered when necessary.

1.0.3.   The hazard assessment shall comprise the following four steps:

         Step 1:        Evaluation of non-human information

         Step 2:        Evaluation of human information

         Step 3:        Classification and Labelling

         Step 4:        Derivation of DNELs

1.0.4.   The first three steps shall be undertaken for every effect for which information is available
         and shall be recorded under the relevant section of the Chemical Safety Report and where
         required and in accordance with Article 31, summarised in the Safety Data Sheet under
         headings 2 and 11.

1.0.5.   For any effect for which no relevant information is available, the relevant section shall
         contain the sentence "This information is not available". The justification, including
         reference to any literature search carried out, shall be included in the technical dossier.
L 396/244             EN              Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


1.0.6.      Step 4 of the human health hazard assessment shall be undertaken by integrating the results
            from the first three steps and shall be included under the relevant heading of the Chemical
            Safety Report and summarised in the Safety Data Sheet under heading 8.1.

1.1.        Step 1:        Evaluation of non-human information

1.1.1.      The evaluation of non-human information shall comprise:

            –     the hazard identification for the effect based on all available non-human information;

            –     the establishment of the quantitative dose (concentration) – response (effect)
                  relationship.

1.1.2.      When it is not possible to establish the quantitative dose (concentration) – response (effect)
            relationship, then this should be justified and a semi-quantitative or qualitative analysis
            shall be included. For instance, for acute effects it is usually not possible to establish the
            quantitative dose (concentration) – response (effect) relationship on the basis of the results
            of a test conducted in accordance with test methods laid down in a Commission Regulation
            as specified in Article 13(3). In such cases it suffices to determine whether and to which
            degree the substance has an inherent capacity to cause the effect.

1.1.3.      All non-human information used to assess a particular effect on humans and to establish
            the dose (concentration) – response (effect) relationship, shall be briefly presented, if
            possible in the form of a table or tables, distinguishing between in vitro, in vivo and other
            information. The relevant test results (e.g. LD50, NO(A)EL or LO(A)EL) and test
            conditions (e.g. test duration, route of administration) and other relevant information shall
            be presented, in internationally recognised units of measurement for that effect.
30.12.2006         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/245


1.1.4.   If one study is available then a robust study summary should be prepared for that study. If
         there are several studies addressing the same effect, then, having taken into account
         possible variables (e.g. conduct, adequacy, relevance of test species, quality of
         results, etc.), normally the study or studies giving rise to the highest concern shall be used
         to establish the DNELs and a robust study summary shall be prepared for that study or
         studies and included as part of the technical dossier. Robust summaries will be required of
         all key data used in the hazard assessment. If the study or studies giving rise to the highest
         concern are not used, then this shall be fully justified and included as part of the technical
         dossier, not only for the study being used but also for all studies demonstrating a higher
         concern than the study being used. It is important irrespective of whether hazards have
         been identified or not that the validity of the study be considered.

1.2.     Step 2:        Evaluation of human information

         If no human information is available, this part shall contain the statement "No human
         information is available". However, if human information is available, it shall be presented,
         if possible in the form of a table.

1.3.     Step 3:        Classification and Labelling

1.3.1.   The appropriate classification and labelling developed in accordance with the criteria in
         Directive 67/548/EEC shall be presented and justified. Where applicable Specific
         Concentration limits, resulting from the application of Article 4(4) of
         Directive 67/548/EEC and Articles 4 to 7 of Directive 1999/45/EC, shall be presented and,
         if they are not included in Annex I to Directive 67/548/EEC, justified. The assessment
         should always include a statement as to whether the substance fulfils or does not fulfil the
         criteria given in Directive 67/548/EEC for CMR, categories 1 and 2.
L 396/246           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


1.3.2.      If the information is inadequate to decide whether a substance should be classified for a
            particular end-point, the registrant shall indicate and justify the action or decision he has
            taken as a result.

1.4.        Step 4: Identification of DNEL(s)

1.4.1.      Based on the outcomes of steps 1 and 2, (a) DNEL(s) shall be established for the
            substance, reflecting the likely route(s), duration and frequency of exposure. For some
            endpoints, especially mutagenicity and carcinogenicity, the available information may not
            enable a threshold, and therefore a DNEL, to be established. If justified by the exposure
            scenario(s), a single DNEL may be sufficient. However, taking into account the available
            information and the exposure scenario(s) in Section 9 of the Chemical Safety Report it may
            be necessary to identify different DNELs for each relevant human population
            (e.g. workers, consumers and humans liable to exposure indirectly via the environment)
            and possibly for certain vulnerable sub-populations (e.g. children, pregnant women) and
            for different routes of exposure. A full justification shall be given specifying, inter alia, the
            choice of the information used, the route of exposure (oral, dermal, inhalation) and the
            duration and frequency of exposure to the substance for which the DNEL is valid. If more
            than one route of exposure is likely to occur, then a DNEL shall be established for each
            route of exposure and for the exposure from all routes combined. When establishing
            the DNEL, the following factors shall, inter alia, be taken into account:
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/247


         (a)   the uncertainty arising, among other factors, from the variability in the experimental
               information and from intra- and inter-species variation;

         (b)   the nature and severity of the effect;

         (c)   the sensitivity of the human (sub-)population to which the quantitative and/or
               qualitative information on exposure applies.

1.4.2.   If it is not possible to identify a DNEL, then this shall be clearly stated and fully justified.

2.       PHYSICOCHEMICAL HAZARD ASSESSMENT

2.1.     The objective of the hazard assessment for physicochemical properties shall be to
         determine the classification and labelling of a substance in accordance with
         Directive 67/548/EEC.

2.2.     As a minimum, the potential effects to human health shall be assessed for the following
         physicochemical properties:

         –     explosivity,

         –     flammability,

         –     oxidising potential.

         If the information are inadequate to decide whether a substance should be classified for a
         particular end-point, the registrant shall indicate and justify the action or decision he has
         taken as a result.
L 396/248          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


2.3.        The assessment of each effect shall be presented under the relevant heading of the
            Chemical Safety Report (Section 7) and where required and in accordance with Article 31,
            summarised in the Safety Data Sheet under headings 2 and 9.

2.4.        For every physicochemical property, the assessment shall entail an evaluation of the
            inherent capacity of the substance to cause the effect resulting from the manufacture and
            identified uses.

2.5.        The appropriate classification and labelling developed in accordance with the criteria in
            Directive 67/548/EEC shall be presented and justified.

3.          ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARD ASSESSMENT

3.0.        Introduction

3.0.1.      The objective of the environmental hazard assessment shall be to determine the
            classification and labelling of a substance in accordance with Directive 67/548/EEC and to
            identify the concentration of the substance below which adverse effects in the
            environmental sphere of concern are not expected to occur. This concentration is known as
            the Predicted No-Effect Concentration (PNEC).

3.0.2.      The environmental hazard assessment shall consider the potential effects on the
            environment, comprising the (1) aquatic (including sediment), (2) terrestrial and
            (3) atmospheric compartments, including the potential effects that may occur (4) via
            food-chain accumulation. In addition, the potential effects on the (5) microbiological
            activity of sewage treatment systems shall be considered. The assessment of the effects on
            each of these five environmental spheres shall be presented under the relevant heading of
            the Chemical Safety Report (Section 7) and where required and in accordance with
            Article 31, summarised in the Safety Data Sheet under headings 2 and 12.
30.12.2006         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/249


3.0.3.   For any environmental sphere, for which no effect information is available, the relevant
         section of the chemical safety report shall contain the sentence "This information is not
         available". The justification, including reference to any literature research carried out, shall
         be included in the technical dossier. For any environmental sphere for which information is
         available, but the manufacturer or importer believes that it is not necessary to conduct the
         hazard assessment, the manufacturer or importer shall present a justification, with
         reference to pertinent information, under the relevant heading of the Chemical Safety
         Report (Section 7) and where required and in accordance with Article 31, summarised in
         the Safety Data Sheet under heading 12.

3.0.4.   The hazard assessment shall comprise the following three steps, which shall be clearly
         identified as such in the Chemical Safety Report:

         Step 1:        Evaluation of information

         Step 2:        Classification and Labelling

         Step 3:        Derivation of the PNEC.

3.1.     Step 1:        Evaluation of information

3.1.1.   The evaluation of all available information shall comprise:

         –     the hazard identification based on all available information,

         –     the establishment of the quantitative dose (concentration) – response (effect)
               relationship.
L 396/250          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


3.1.2.      When it is not possible to establish the quantitative dose (concentration) – response (effect)
            relationship, then this should be justified and a semi-quantitative or qualitative analysis
            shall be included.

3.1.3.      All information used to assess the effects on a specific environmental sphere shall be
            briefly presented, if possible in the form of a table or tables. The relevant test results
            (e.g. LC50 or NOEC) and test conditions (e.g. test duration, route of administration) and
            other relevant information shall be presented, in internationally recognised units of
            measurement for that effect.

3.1.4.      All information used to assess the environmental fate of the substance shall be briefly
            presented, if possible in the form of a table or tables. The relevant test results and test
            conditions and other relevant information shall be presented, in internationally recognised
            units of measurement for that effect.

3.1.5.      If one study is available then a robust study summary should be prepared for that study.
            Where there are more than one studies addressing the same effect, then the study or studies
            giving rise to the highest concern shall be used to draw a conclusion and a robust study
            summary shall be prepared for that study or studies and included as part of the technical
            dossier. Robust summaries will be required of all key data used in the hazard assessment.
            If the study or studies giving rise to the highest concern are not used, then this shall be
            fully justified and included as part of the technical dossier, not only for the study being
            used but also for all studies reaching a higher concern than the study being used. For
            substances where all available studies indicate no hazards an overall assessment of the
            validity of all studies should be performed.
30.12.2006          EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/251


3.2.      Step 2:        Classification and Labelling

3.2.1.    The appropriate classification and labelling developed in accordance with the criteria in
          Directive 67/548/EEC shall be presented and justified. Where applicable Specific
          Concentration limits, resulting from the application of Article 4(4) of
          Directive 67/548/EEC and Articles 4 to 7 of Directive 1999/45/EC, shall be presented and,
          if they are not included in Annex I to Directive 67/548/EEC, justified.

3.2.2.    If the information are inadequate to decide whether a substance should be classified for a
          particular end-point, the registrant shall indicate and justify the action or decision he has
          taken as a result.

3.3.      Step 3:        Identification of the PNEC

3.3.1.    Based on the available information, the PNEC for each environmental sphere shall be
          established. The PNEC may be calculated by applying an appropriate assessment factor to
          the effect values (e.g. LC50 or NOEC). An assessment factor expresses the difference
          between effects values derived for a limited number of species from laboratory tests and
          the PNEC for the environmental sphere1.

3.3.2.    If it is not possible to derive the PNEC, then this shall be clearly stated and fully justified.




1
         In general, the more extensive the data and the longer the duration of the tests, the smaller is
         the degree of uncertainty and the size of the assessment factor. An assessment factor
         of 1 000 is typically applied to the lowest of three short term L(E)C50 values derived from
         species representing different trophic levels and a factor of 10 to the lowest of three
         long-term NOEC values derived from species representing different trophic levels.
L 396/252             EN              Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


4.          PBT AND VPVB ASSESSMENT

4.0.        Introduction

4.0.1.      The objective of the PBT and vPvB assessment shall be to determine if the substance
            fulfils the criteria given in Annex XIII and if so, to characterise the potential emissions of
            the substance. A hazard assessment in accordance with Sections 1 and 3 of this Annex
            addressing all the long-term effects and the estimation of the long-term exposure of
            humans and the environment as carried out in accordance with Section 5 (Exposure
            Assessment), step 2 (Exposure Estimation), cannot be carried out with sufficient reliability
            for substances satisfying the PBT and vPvB criteria in Annex XIII. Therefore, a separate
            PBT and vPvB assessment is required.

4.0.2.      The PBT and vPvB assessment shall comprise the following two steps, which shall be
            clearly identified as such in Part B, Section 8 of the Chemical Safety Report:

            Step 1:        Comparison with the Criteria

            Step 2:        Emission Characterisation

            The assessment shall also be summarised in the Safety Data Sheet under heading 12.

4.1.        Step 1:        Comparison with the Criteria

            This part of the PBT and vPvB assessment shall entail the comparison of the available
            information, which is submitted as part of the technical dossier, with the criteria given in
            Annex XIII and a statement of whether the substance fulfils or does not fulfil the criteria.
30.12.2006         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/253


         If the available information is not sufficient to decide whether the substance fulfils the
         criteria in Annex XIII, then other evidence like monitoring data available for the registrant
         and giving rise to an equivalent level of concern shall be considered on a case-by-case
         basis.

         If the technical dossier contains for one or more endpoints only information as required in
         Annexes VII and VIII, the registrant shall consider information relevant for screening
         for P, B and T properties to decide whether further information needs to be generated to
         fulfil the objective of the PBT and vPvB assessment. In case the generation of further
         information is necessary and would require testing on vertebrate animals, the registrant
         shall submit a testing proposal. However, such further information does not need to be
         generated if the registrant implements or recommends sufficient risk management
         measures and operational conditions that enable derogation according to Section 3 of
         Annex XI from testing relevant for PBT and vPvB assessment.

4.2.     Step 2:        Emission Characterisation

         If the substance fulfils the criteria an emission characterisation shall be conducted
         comprising the relevant parts of the exposure assessment as described in Section 5. In
         particular it shall contain an estimation of the amounts of the substance released to the
         different environmental compartments during all activities carried out by the manufacturer
         or importer and all identified uses, and an identification of the likely routes by which
         humans and the environment are exposed to the substance.
L 396/254             EN                Official Journal of the European Union                   30.12.2006


5.          EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT

5.0.        Introduction

            The objective of the exposure assessment shall be to make a quantitative or qualitative
            estimate of the dose/concentration of the substance to which humans and the environment
            are or may be exposed. The assessment shall consider all stages of the life-cycle of the
            substance resulting from the manufacture and identified uses and shall cover any exposures
            that may relate to the hazards identified in sections 1 to 4. The exposure assessment shall
            entail the following two steps, which shall be clearly identified as such in the Chemical
            Safety Report:

            Step 1:        Generation of exposure scenario(s) or the generation of relevant use and
                           exposure categories

            Step 2:        Exposure Estimation.

            Where required and in accordance with Article 31, the exposure scenario shall also be
            included in an annex to the Safety Data Sheet.

5.1.        Step 1:         Development of exposure scenarios
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/255


5.1.1.   Exposure scenarios as described in sections 0.7 and 0.8 shall be generated. Exposure
         scenarios are the core of the process to carry out a chemical safety assessment. The
         chemical safety assessment process may be iterative. The first assessment will be based on
         the required minimum and all available hazard information and on the exposure estimation
         that corresponds to the initial assumptions about the operating conditions and risk
         management measures (an initial exposure scenario). If the initial assumptions lead to a
         risk characterisation indicating that risks to human health and the environment are not
         adequately controlled, then it is necessary to carry out an iterative process with amendment
         of one or a number of factors in hazard or exposure assessment with the aim to
         demonstrate adequate control. The refinement of hazard assessment may require
         generation of additional hazard information. The refinement of exposure assessment may
         involve appropriate alteration of the operational conditions or risk management measures
         in the exposure scenario or more precise exposure estimation. The exposure scenario,
         resulting from the final iteration (a final exposure scenario), shall be included in the
         chemical safety report and attached to the safety data sheet in accordance with Article 31.

         The final exposure scenario shall be presented under the relevant heading of the chemical
         safety report, and included in an annex to the safety data sheet, using an appropriate short
         title giving a brief general description of the use, consistent with those given in Section 3.5
         of Annex VI. Exposure scenarios shall cover any manufacture in the Community and all
         identified uses.

         In particular, an exposure scenario includes, where relevant, a description of:
L 396/256          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


            Operational conditions

            –     the processes involved, including the physical form in which the substance is
                  manufactured, processed and/or used,

            –     the activities of workers related to the processes and the duration and frequency of
                  their exposure to the substance,

            –     the activities of consumers and the duration and frequency of their exposure to the
                  substance,

            –     the duration and frequency of emissions of the substance to the different
                  environmental compartments and sewage treatment systems and the dilution in the
                  receiving environmental compartment.

            Risk management measures

            –     the risk management measures to reduce or avoid direct and indirect exposure of
                  humans (including workers and consumers) and the different environmental
                  compartments to the substance,

            –     the waste management measures to reduce or avoid exposure of humans and the
                  environment to the substance during waste disposal and/or recycling.

5.1.2.      Where a manufacturer, importer or downstream user applies for an application for an
            authorisation for a specific use, exposure scenarios need only be developed for that use and
            the subsequent life-cycle steps.
30.12.2006         EN             Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/257


5.2.     Step 2:        Exposure Estimation

5.2.1.   The exposure shall be estimated for each exposure scenario developed and shall be
         presented under the relevant heading of the Chemical Safety Report and where required
         and in accordance with Article 31, summarised in an annex to the safety data sheet. The
         exposure estimation entails three elements: (1) emission estimation; (2) assessment of
         chemical fate and pathways; and (3) estimation of exposure levels.

5.2.2.   The emission estimation shall consider the emissions during all relevant parts of the
         life-cycle of the substance resulting from the manufacture and each of the identified uses.
         The life-cycle stages resulting from the manufacture of the substance cover, where
         relevant, the waste stage. The life-cycle stages resulting from identified uses cover, where
         relevant, the service-life of articles and the waste stage. The emission estimation shall be
         performed under the assumption that the risk management measures and operational
         conditions described in the exposure scenario have been implemented.

5.2.3.   A characterisation of possible degradation, transformation, or reaction processes and an
         estimation of environmental distribution and fate shall be performed.

5.2.4.   An estimation of the exposure levels shall be performed for all human populations
         (workers, consumers and humans liable to exposure indirectly via the environment) and
         environmental spheres for which exposure to the substance is known or reasonably
         foreseeable. Each relevant route of human exposure (inhalation, oral, dermal and combined
         through all relevant routes and sources of exposure) shall be addressed. Such estimations
         shall take account of spatial and temporal variations in the exposure pattern. In particular,
         the exposure estimation shall take account of:
L 396/258        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


            –   adequately measured, representative exposure data,

            –   any major impurities and additives in the substance,

            –   the quantity in which the substance is produced and/or imported,

            –   the quantity for each identified use,

            –   implemented or recommended risk management, including the degree of
                containment,

            –   duration and frequency of exposure according to the operational conditions,

            –   the activities of workers related to the processes and the duration and frequency of
                their exposure to the substance,

            –   the activities of consumers and the duration and frequency of their exposure to the
                substance,

            –   the duration and frequency of emissions of the substance to the different
                environmental compartments and the dilution in the receiving environmental
                compartment,

            –   the physicochemical properties of the substance,

            –   transformation and/or degradation products,

            –   the likely routes of exposure of and potential for absorption in humans,
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/259


         –     the likely pathways to the environment and environmental distribution and
               degradation and/or transformation (see also Section 3 Step 1),

         –     scale (geographical) of exposure,

         –     matrix dependent release/migration of the substance.

5.2.5.   Where adequately measured representative exposure data are available, special
         consideration shall be given to them when conducting the exposure assessment.
         Appropriate models can be used for the estimation of exposure levels. Relevant monitoring
         data from substances with analogous use and exposure patterns or analogous properties can
         also be considered.

6.       RISK CHARACTERISATION

6.1.     The risk characterisation shall be carried out for each exposure scenario and shall be
         presented under the relevant heading of the Chemical Safety Report.

6.2.     The risk characterisation shall consider the human populations (exposed as workers,
         consumers or indirectly via the environment and if relevant a combination thereof) and the
         environmental spheres for which exposure to the substance is known or reasonably
         foreseeable, under the assumption that the risk management measures described in the
         exposure scenarios in the Section 5 have been implemented. In addition, the overall
         environmental risk caused by the substance shall be reviewed by integrating the results for
         the overall releases, emissions and losses from all sources to all environmental
         compartments.
L 396/260          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


6.3.        The risk characterisation consists of:

            –     a comparison of the exposure of each human population known to be or likely to be
                  exposed with the appropriate DNEL,

            –     a comparison of the predicted environmental concentrations in each environmental
                  sphere with the PNECs, and

            –     an assessment of the likelihood and severity of an event occurring due to the
                  physicochemical properties of the substance.

6.4.        For any exposure scenario, the risk to humans and the environment can be considered to be
            adequately controlled, throughout the lifecycle of the substance that results from
            manufacture or identified uses, if:

            –     the exposure levels estimated in Section 6.2 do not exceed the appropriate DNEL or
                  the PNEC, as determined in Sections 1 and 3, respectively, and,

            –     the likelihood and severity of an event occurring due to the physicochemical
                  properties of the substance as determined in Section 2 is negligible.

6.5.        For those human effects and those environmental spheres for which it was not possible to
            determine a DNEL or a PNEC, a qualitative assessment of the likelihood that effects are
            avoided when implementing the exposure scenario shall be carried out.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                   L 396/261


         For substances satisfying the PBT and vPvB criteria, the manufacturer or importer shall
         use the information as obtained in Section 5, Step 2 when implementing on its site, and
         recommending for downstream users, risk management measures which minimise
         exposures and emissions to humans and the environment, throughout the lifecycle of the
         substance that results from manufacture or identified uses.

7.       CHEMICAL SAFETY REPORT FORMAT

         The Chemical Safety Report shall include the following headings:

                             CHEMICAL SAFETY REPORT FORMAT

                                            PART A

1.    SUMMARY OF RISK MANAGEMENT MEASURES

2.    DECLARATION THAT RISK MANAGEMENT MEASURES ARE IMPLEMENTED

3.    DECLARATION THAT RISK MANAGEMENT MEASURES ARE
      COMMUNICATED

                                            PART B

1.    IDENTITY OF THE SUBSTANCE AND PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL
      PROPERTIES

2.    MANUFACTURE AND USES

       2.1.    Manufacture

       2.2.    Identified uses

       2.3.    Uses advised against
L 396/262      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union              30.12.2006


                               CHEMICAL SAFETY REPORT FORMAT

3.    CLASSIFICATION AND LABELLING

4.    ENVIRONMENTAL FATE PROPERTIES

       4.1.   Degradation

       4.2.   Environmental distribution

       4.3.   Bioaccumulation

       4.4.   Secondary Poisoning

5.    HUMAN HEALTH HAZARD ASSESSMENT

      5.1.    Toxicokinetics (absorption, metabolism, distribution and elimination)

      5.2.    Acute toxicity

      5.3.    Irritation

              5.3.1. Skin

              5.3.2. Eye

              5.3.3. Respiratory Tract

      5.4.    Corrosivity
30.12.2006    EN                Official Journal of the European Union   L 396/263


                             CHEMICAL SAFETY REPORT FORMAT

      5.5.   Sensitisation

             5.5.1. Skin

             5.5.2. Respiratory system

      5.6.   Repeated dose toxicity

      5.7.   Mutagenicity

      5.8.   Carcinogenicity

      5.9.   Toxicity for reproduction

             5.9.1. Effects on fertility

             5.9.2. Developmental Toxicity
L 396/264      EN                Official Journal of the European Union   30.12.2006


                              CHEMICAL SAFETY REPORT FORMAT

      5.10.   Other effects

      5.11.   Derivation of DNEL(s)

6.    HUMAN HEALTH HAZARD ASSESSMENT OF PHYSICOCHEMICAL
      PROPERTIES

      6.1.    Explosivity

      6.2.    Flammability

      6.3.    Oxidising potential

7.    ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARD ASSESSMENT

      7.1.    Aquatic Compartment (including sediment)

      7.2.    Terrestrial Compartment

      7.3.    Atmospheric Compartment

      7.4.    Microbiological Activity in Sewage Treatment Systems

8.    PBT AND VPVB ASSESSMENT

9.    EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT

      9.1.    [Title of Exposure Scenario 1]

              9.1.1. Exposure Scenario

              9.1.2. Exposure Estimation
30.12.2006     EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/265


                              CHEMICAL SAFETY REPORT FORMAT

      9.2.    [Title of Exposure Scenario 2]

              9.2.1. Exposure Scenario

              9.2.2. Exposure Estimation

              [etc.]

10.   RISK CHARACTERISATION

      10.1.   [Title of Exposure Scenario 1]

              10.1.1. Human Health

                       10.1.1.1.       Workers

                       10.1.1.2.       Consumers

                       10.1.1.3.       Indirect exposure to humans via the environment

              10.1.2. Environment

                       10.1.2.1.       Aquatic Compartment (incl. Sediment)

                       10.1.2.2.       Terrestrial Compartment

                       10.1.2.3.       Atmospheric Compartment

                       10.1.2.4.       Microbiological Activity in Sewage Treatment Systems
L 396/266      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


                              CHEMICAL SAFETY REPORT FORMAT

      10.2.   [Title of Exposure Scenario 2]

              10.2.1. Human Health

                     10.2.1.1.       Workers

                     10.2.1.2.       Consumers

                     10.2.1.3.       Indirect exposure to humans via the environment

              10.2.2. Environment

                     10.2.2.1.       Aquatic Compartment (incl. Sediment)

                     10.2.2.2.       Terrestrial Compartment

                     10.2.2.3.       Atmospheric Compartment

                     10.2.2.4.       Microbiological Activity in Sewage Treatment Systems

                     [etc.]

      10.x.   Overall exposure (combined for all relevant emission/release sources)

              10.x.1. Human health (combined for all exposure routes)

                     10.x.1.1.

              10.x.2. Environment (combined for all emission sources)

                     10.x.2.1.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/267


                                              ANNEX II

                 GUIDE TO THE COMPILATION OF SAFETY DATA SHEETS

This Annex sets out the requirements for a Safety Data Sheet that is provided for a substance or a
preparation in accordance with Article 31. The Safety Data Sheet provides a mechanism for
transmitting appropriate safety information on classified substances and preparations, including
information from the relevant Chemical Safety Report(s) down the supply chain to the immediate
downstream user(s). The information provided in the Safety Data Sheet shall be consistent with the
information in the Chemical Safety Report, where one is required. Where a Chemical Safety Report
has been performed, the relevant exposure scenario(s) shall be placed into an annex of the Safety
Data Sheet, to make reference to them under the relevant headings of the Safety Data Sheet easier.

The purpose of this Annex is to ensure consistency and accuracy in the content of each of the
mandatory headings listed in Article 31, so that the resulting Safety Data Sheets will enable users to
take the necessary measures relating to protection of human health and safety at the workplace, and
protection of the environment.

The information provided by Safety Data Sheets shall also meet the requirements set out in
Directive 98/24/EC on the protection of the health and safety of workers from the risks related to
chemical agents at work. In particular, the Safety Data Sheet shall enable the employer to determine
whether any hazardous chemical agents are present in the workplace, and to assess any risk to the
health and safety of workers arising from their use.
L 396/268        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


The information in the Safety Data Sheet shall be written in a clear and concise manner. The Safety
Data Sheet shall be prepared by a competent person who shall take into account the specific needs
of the user audience, as far as it is known. Persons placing substances and preparations on the
market shall ensure that competent persons have received appropriate training, including refresher
training.

For preparations not classified as dangerous, but for which a Safety Data Sheet is required
according to Article 31, proportionate information shall be provided under each heading.

Additional information may be necessary in some cases in view of the wide range of properties of
the substances and preparations. If in other cases it emerges that information on certain properties is
of no significance or that it is technically impossible to provide, the reasons for this shall be clearly
stated under each heading. Information shall be provided for each hazardous property. If it is stated
that a particular hazard does not apply, clearly differentiate between cases where no information is
available to the classifier, and cases where negative test results are available.

Give the date of issue of the Safety Data Sheet on the first page. When a safety data sheet has been
revised, the changes shall be brought to the attention of the recipient and identify it as
"Revision: (date)".

Note

Safety data sheets are also required for certain special substances and preparations (e.g. metals in
massive form, alloys, compressed gases, etc.) listed in chapters 8 and 9 of Annex VI to
Directive 67/548/EEC, for which there are labelling derogations.
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/269


1.       IDENTIFICATION OF THE SUBSTANCE/PREPARATION AND OF THE
         COMPANY/UNDERTAKING

1.1.     Identification of the substance or preparation

         The term used for identification shall be identical to that provided on the label as set out in
         Annex VI to Directive 67/548/EEC.

         For substances subject to registration, the term shall be consistent with that provided under
         registration and the registration number assigned under Article 20(1) of this Regulation
         shall also be indicated.

         Other means of identification available may also be indicated.

1.2.     Use of the substance/preparation

         Indicate the uses of the substance or preparation as far as they are known. Where there are
         many possible uses, only the most important or common uses need to be listed. This shall
         include a brief description of what it actually does, e.g. flame retardant, anti-oxidant, etc.

         Where a Chemical Safety Report is required, the Safety Data Sheet shall contain
         information on all the identified uses relevant to the recipient of the Safety Data Sheet.
         This information shall be consistent with the identified uses and exposure scenarios set out
         in the annex to the Safety Data Sheet.
L 396/270          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


1.3.        Company/undertaking identification

            Identify the person responsible for placing the substance or preparation on the market
            within the Community, whether it is the manufacturer, importer or distributor. Give the full
            address and telephone number of this person as well as the e-mail address of the competent
            person responsible for the Safety Data Sheet.

            In addition, where this person is not located in the Member State where the substance or
            preparation is placed on the market, give a full address and telephone number for the
            person responsible in that Member State, if possible.

            For registrants, the person identified shall be consistent with the information on the identity
            of the manufacturer or importer provided in the registration.

1.4.        Emergency telephone

            In addition to the above mentioned information, supply the emergency telephone number
            of the company and/or relevant official advisory body (this may be the body responsible
            for receiving information relating to health, which is referred to in Article 17 of
            Directive 1999/45/EC). Specify if this phone number is available only during office hours.
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/271


2.       HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION

         Give here the classification of the substance or preparation which arises from application
         of the classification rules in Directives 67/548/EEC or 1999/45/EC. Indicate clearly and
         briefly the hazards the substance or preparation presents to man and the environment.

         Distinguish clearly between preparations which are classified as dangerous and
         preparations which are not classified as dangerous according to Directive 1999/45/EC.

         Describe the most important adverse physicochemical, human health and environmental
         effects and symptoms relating to the uses and possible misuses of the substance or
         preparation that can reasonably be foreseen.

         It may be necessary to mention other hazards, such as dustiness, cross-sensitisation,
         suffocation, freezing, high potency for odour or taste or environmental effects such as
         hazards to soil-dwelling organisms, ozone depletion, photochemical ozone creation
         potential, etc., which do not result in classification but which may contribute to the overall
         hazards of the material.

         The information shown on the label shall be given under heading 15.

         The classification of the substance shall be consistent with the classification provided to
         the classification and labelling inventory according to Title XI.
L 396/272             EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


3.          COMPOSITION/INFORMATION ON INGREDIENTS

            The information given shall enable the recipient to identify readily the hazards of the
            components of the preparation. The hazards of the preparation itself shall be given under
            heading 2.

3.1.        It is not necessary to give the full composition (nature of the ingredients and their
            concentration), although a general description of the components and their concentrations
            can be helpful.

3.2.        For a preparation classified as dangerous according to Directive 1999/45/EC, the following
            substances shall be indicated, together with their concentration or concentration range in
            the preparation:

            (a)   substances presenting a health or environmental hazard within the meaning of
                  Directive 67/548/EEC, if they are present in concentrations equal to or greater than
                  the lowest of:

                  –        the applicable concentrations defined in the table of Article 3(3) of
                           Directive 1999/45/EC, or

                  –        the concentration limits given in Annex I to Directive 67/548/EEC, or

                  –        the concentration limits given in Part B of Annex II to Directive 1999/45/EC,
                           or
30.12.2006         EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/273


               –        the concentration limits given in Part B of Annex III Directive 1999/45/EC, or

               –        the concentration limits given in Annex V to Directive 1999/45/EC, or

               –        the concentration limits given in an agreed entry in the classification and
                        labelling inventory established under Title XI of this Regulation;

         (b)   substances for which there are Community workplace exposure limits, which are not
               already included under point (a);

         (c)   substances that are persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic or very persistent and very
               bioaccumulative in accordance with the criteria set out in Annex XIII, if the
               concentration of an individual substance is equal to or greater than 0,1 %.

3.3.     For a preparation not classified as dangerous according to Directive 1999/45/EC, the
         substances shall be indicated, together with their concentration or concentration range, if
         they are present in an individual concentration of either:

         (a)   ≥ 1 % by weight for non-gaseous preparations and ≥ 0,2 % by volume for gaseous
               preparations and

               –        the substances present a health or environmental hazard within the meaning of
                        Directive 67/548/EEC1; or

               –        the substances are assigned Community workplace exposure limits;

         or




1
       Where the person responsible for placing the preparation on the market can demonstrate that
       the disclosure in the safety data sheet of the chemical identity of a substance which is
       exclusively classified as irritant with the exception of those assigned R41 or irritant in
       combination with one or more of the properties mentioned in point 2.3.4 of Article 10 of
       Directive 1999/45/EC, or harmful or harmful in combination with one or more of the
       properties mentioned in point 2.3.4 of Article 10 of Directive 1999/45/EC presenting acute
       lethal effects alone, will put at risk the confidential nature of his intellectual property, he
       may, in accordance with the provisions of Part B of Annex VI to Directive 1999/45/EC,
       refer to that substance either by means of a name that identifies the most important
       functional chemical groups, or by means of an alternative name.
L 396/274             EN              Official Journal of the European Union                         30.12.2006

            (b)   ≥0,1 % by weight and the substances are persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic or
                  very persistent and very bioaccumulative in accordance with the criteria set out in
                  Annex XIII.

3.4.        The classification (derived either from Articles 4 and 6 of Directive 67/548/EEC, from
            Annex I to Directive 67/548/EEC or from an agreed entry in the classification and labelling
            inventory established under Title XI of this Regulation) of the above substances shall be
            given, including the symbol letters and R phrases which are assigned in accordance with
            their physicochemical, human health and environmental hazards. The R phrases do not
            need to be written out in full here: reference shall be made to heading 16, where the full
            text of each relevant R phrase shall be listed. If the substance does not meet the
            classification criteria, the reason for indicating the substance in section 3 shall be
            described, such as "PBT-substance" or "substance with a Community workplace exposure
            limit".

3.5.        The name and the Registration number, assigned under Article 20(1) of this Regulation,
            EINECS or ELINCs number, if available, of the above substances shall be given in
            accordance with Directive 67/548/EEC. The CAS number and IUPAC name (if available)
            may also be helpful. For substances listed by a generic name, according to Article 15 of
            Directive 1999/45/EC or the footnote to Section 3.3 of this Annex, a precise chemical
            identifier is not necessary.

3.6.        If, in accordance with the provisions of Article 15 of Directive 1999/45/EC or the footnote
            to Section 3.3 of this Annex, the identity of certain substances is to be kept confidential,
            their chemical nature shall be described in order to ensure safe handling. The name used
            shall be the same as that which derives from the above procedures.
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                   L 396/275


4.       FIRST AID MEASURES

         Describe the first-aid measures.

         Specify first whether immediate medical attention is required.

         The information on first aid shall be brief and easy to understand by the victim, bystanders
         and first-aiders. The symptoms and effects shall be briefly summarised. The instructions
         shall indicate what is to be done on the spot in the case of an accident and whether delayed
         effects can be expected after exposure.

         Subdivide the information according to the different routes of exposure, i.e. inhalation,
         skin and eye contact and ingestion, under different subheadings.

         Indicate whether professional assistance by a doctor is needed or advisable.

         For some substances or preparations it may be important to emphasise that special means
         to provide specific and immediate treatment shall be available at the workplace.

5.       FIRE-FIGHTING MEASURES

         Refer to requirements for fighting a fire caused by the substance or preparation, or arising
         in its vicinity by indicating:

         –     suitable extinguishing media,

         –     extinguishing media which shall not be used for safety reasons,
L 396/276          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


            –     special exposure hazards arising from the substance or preparation itself, combustion
                  products, resulting gases,

            –     special protective equipment for fire-fighters.

6.          ACCIDENTAL RELEASE MEASURES

            Depending on the substance or preparation involved, information may be needed on:

            personal precautions such as:

            –     removal of ignition sources, provision for sufficient ventilation/respiratory
                  protection, control of dust, prevention of skin and eye contact,

            environmental precautions such as:

            –     keeping away from drains, surface- and ground-water and soil, possible need to alert
                  the neighbourhood,

            methods for cleaning up such as:

            –     use of absorbent material (e.g. sand, diatomaceous earth, acid binder, universal
                  binder, sawdust, etc.), reduction of gases/fumes with water, dilution.

            Also consider the need for indications such as: "never use, neutralise with ...".
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/277


         Note

         If appropriate refer to headings 8 and 13.

7.       HANDLING AND STORAGE

         Note

         Information in this section shall relate to the protection of human health, safety and the
         environment. It shall assist the employer in devising suitable working procedures and
         organisational measures according to Article 5 of Directive 98/24/EC.

         Where a chemical safety report or a registration is required, the information in this section
         shall be consistent with the information given, for the identified uses and exposure
         scenarios set out in the annex to the Safety Data Sheet.

7.1.     Handling

         Specify precautions for safe handling including advice on technical measures such as:

         –      containment, local and general ventilation, measures to prevent aerosol and dust
                generation and fire, measures required to protect the environment (e.g. use of filters
                or scrubbers on exhaust ventilation, use in a bunded area, measures for collection and
                disposal of spillages, etc.) and any specific requirements or rules relating to the
                substance or preparation (e.g. procedures or equipment which are prohibited or
                recommended) and if possible give a brief description.
L 396/278          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


7.2.        Storage

            Specify the conditions for safe storage such as:

            –     specific design for storage rooms or vessels (including retention walls and
                  ventilation), incompatible materials, conditions of storage (temperature and humidity
                  limit/range, light, inert gas, etc.) special electrical equipment and prevention of static
                  electricity.

            Give advice if relevant on quantity limits under storage conditions. In particular indicate
            any special requirements such as the type of material used in the packaging/containers of
            the substance or preparation.

7.3.        Specific use(s)

            For end products designed for specific use(s), recommendations shall refer to the identified
            use(s) and be detailed and operational. If possible, reference shall be made to industry – or
            sector – specific approved guidance.

8.          EXPOSURE CONTROLS/PERSONAL PROTECTION

8.1.        Exposure limit values

            Specify currently applicable specific control parameters including occupational exposure
            limit values and/or biological limit values. Values shall be given for the Member State
            where the substance or preparation is placed on the market. Give information on currently
            recommended monitoring procedures.
30.12.2006        EN              Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/279


         Where a Chemical Safety Report is required, the relevant DNELs and PNECs for the
         substance shall be given for the exposure scenarios set out in the annex to the Safety Data
         Sheet.

         For preparations, it is useful to provide values for those constituent substances which are
         required to be listed in the Safety Data Sheet according to heading 3.

8.2.     Exposure controls

         For the purposes of this document exposure control means the full range of specific risk
         management measures to be taken during use in order to minimise worker and
         environmental exposure. Where a chemical safety report is required, a summary of the risk
         management measures shall be given in Section 8 of the Safety Data Sheet for the
         identified uses set out in the Safety Data Sheet.

8.2.1.   Occupational exposure controls

         This information will be taken into account by the employer in carrying out an assessment
         of risk to the health and safety of workers for the substance or preparation under Article 4
         of Directive 98/24/EC, which requires, in the order of priority:

         –     design of appropriate work processes and engineering controls, the use of adequate
               equipment and materials,

         –     the application of collective protection measures at source, such as adequate
               ventilation and appropriate organisational measures, and

         –     where exposure cannot be prevented by other means the use of individual protection
               measures, such as personal protection equipment.
L 396/280             EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  30.12.2006


            Therefore provide suitable and adequate information on these measures to enable a proper
            risk assessment to be carried out under Article 4 of Directive 98/24/EC. This information
            shall complement that already given under heading 7.1.

            Where individual protection measures are needed, specify in detail which equipment will
            provide adequate and suitable protection. Take into account Council Directive 89/686/EEC
            of 21 December 1989 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to
            personal protective equipment1 and make reference to the appropriate CEN standards:

            (a)   Respiratory protection

                  For dangerous gases, vapours or dust, specify the type of protective equipment to be
                  used, such as:

                  –        self contained breathing apparatus, adequate masks and filters.

            (b)   Hand protection

                  Specify clearly the type of gloves to be worn when handling the substance or
                  preparation, including:

                  –        the type of material,

                  –        the breakthrough time of the glove material, with regard to the amount and
                           duration of dermal exposure.

                  If necessary indicate any additional hand protection measures.




1
       OJ L 399, 30.12.1989, p. 18. Directive as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003.
30.12.2006         EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/281


         (c)   Eye protection

               Specify the type of eye protection equipment required such as:

               –        safety glasses, safety goggles, face shield.

         (d)   Skin protection

               If it is necessary to protect a part of the body other than the hands, specify the type
               and quality of protection equipment required, such as:

               –        apron, boots and full protective suit.

               If necessary, indicate any additional skin protection measures and specific hygiene
               measures.

8.2.2.   Environmental exposure controls

         Specify the information required by the employer to fulfil his commitments under
         Community environmental protection legislation.

         Where a chemical safety report is required, a summary of the risk management measures
         that adequately control exposure of the environment to the substance shall be given for the
         exposure scenarios set out in the annex to the Safety Data Sheet.
L 396/282           EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


9.          PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES

            To enable proper control measures to be taken, provide all relevant information on the
            substance or preparation, particularly the information listed under heading 9.2. The
            information in this section shall be consistent with the information provided in a
            registration where one is required.

9.1.        General information

            Appearance

            Indicate the physical state (solid, liquid, gas) and the colour of the substance or preparation
            as supplied.

            Odour

            If odour is perceptible, give a brief description of it.

9.2.        Important health, safety and environmental information

            pH:

            Indicate the pH of the substance or preparation as supplied or of an aqueous solution; in the
            latter case, indicate the concentration.

            Boiling point/boiling range

            Flash point

            Flammability (solid, gas)

            Explosive properties

            Oxidising properties
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/283


         Vapour pressure

         Relative density

         Solubility

         Water solubility

         Partition coefficient: n-octanol/water

         Viscosity

         Vapour density

         Evaporation rate

9.3.     Other information

         Indicate other important safety parameters, such as, miscibility, fat solubility (solvent – oil
         to be specified), conductivity, melting point/melting range, gas group (useful for
         Directive 94/9/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of 23 March 1994 on the
         approximation of the laws of the Member States concerning equipment and protective
         systems intended for use in potentially explosive atmospheres1), auto-ignition
         temperature, etc.




1
       OJ L 100, 19.4.1994, p. 1. Directive as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003.
L 396/284            EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006

            Note 1

            The above properties shall be determined in accordance with the specifications laid down
            in the Commission Regulation on testing methods referred to in Article 13(3) or any other
            comparable method.

            Note 2

            For preparations, information shall normally be given on the properties of the preparation
            itself. However, if it is stated that a particular hazard does not apply, clearly differentiate
            between cases where no information is available to the classifier, and cases where negative
            test results are available. If it is considered necessary to give information about the
            properties of individual components, please indicate clearly what the data refers to.

10.         STABILITY AND REACTIVITY

            State the stability of the substance or preparation and the possibility of hazardous reactions
            occurring under certain conditions of use and also if released into the environment.

10.1.   Conditions to avoid

            List those conditions such as temperature, pressure, light, shock, etc., which may cause a
            dangerous reaction and if possible give a brief description.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/285


10.2.   Materials to avoid

         List materials such as water, air, acids, bases, oxidising agents or any other specific
         substance which may cause a dangerous reaction and if possible give a brief description.

10.3.   Hazardous decomposition products

         List hazardous materials produced in dangerous amounts upon decomposition.

         Note

         Address specifically:

         –      the need for and the presence of stabilisers,

         –      the possibility of a hazardous exothermic reaction,

         –      safety significance, if any, of a change in physical appearance of the substance or
                preparation,

         –      hazardous decomposition products, if any, formed upon contact with water,

         –      possibility of degradation to unstable products.

11.      TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION

         This section deals with the need for a concise but complete and comprehensible description
         of the various toxicological (health) effects, which can arise if the user comes into contact
         with the substance or preparation.
L 396/286           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


            The information shall include dangerous-to-health effects from exposure to the substance
            or preparation, based on the conclusion from, for example, test data and experience. The
            information shall also include, where appropriate, delayed, immediate and chronic effects
            from short- and long-term exposure such as sensitisation, narcosis, carcinogenicity,
            mutagenicity and reproductive toxicity (developmental toxicity and fertility). It shall also
            include information on the different routes of exposure (inhalation, ingestion, skin and eye
            contact), and describe the symptoms related to the physical, chemical and toxicological
            characteristics.

            Taking account of the information already provided under heading 3,
            composition/information on ingredients, it may be necessary to make reference to specific
            health effects of certain substances in the preparation.

            The information in this section shall be consistent with the information provided for in a
            registration where required and/or in a Chemical Safety Report where required and shall
            give information on the following groups of potential effects:

            –     toxicokinetics, metabolism and distribution,

            –     acute effects (acute toxicity, irritation and corrosivity),

            –     sensitisation,

            –     repeated dose toxicity, and

            –     CMR effects (carcinogenity, mutagenicity and toxicity for reproduction).
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/287


         For substances subject to registration, summaries of the information derived from the
         application of Annexes VII to XI of this Regulation shall be given. The information shall
         also include the result of the comparison of the available data with the criteria given in
         Directive 67/548/EEC for CMR, categories 1 and 2, following paragraph 1.3.1 of Annex I
         of this Regulation.

12.      ECOLOGICAL INFORMATION

         Describe the possible effects, behaviour and environmental fate of the substance or
         preparation in air, water and/or soil. Where available, give relevant test data
         (e.g. LC50 fish ≤ 1 mg/l).

         The information in this section shall be consistent with the information provided for in a
         registration where required and/or in a Chemical Safety Report where required.

         Describe the most important characteristics likely to have an effect on the environment
         owing to the nature of the substance or preparation and likely methods of use. Information
         of the same kind shall be supplied for dangerous products arising from the degradation of
         substances and preparations. This may include the following:
L 396/288          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


12.1.       Ecotoxicity

            This shall include relevant available data on aquatic toxicity, both acute and chronic for
            fish, crustaceans, algae and other aquatic plants. In addition, toxicity data on soil
            micro- and macro-organisms and other environmentally relevant organisms, such as birds,
            bees and plants, shall be included when available. Where the substance or preparation has
            inhibitory effects on the activity of micro-organisms, the possible impact on sewage
            treatment plants shall be mentioned.

            For substances subject to registration, summaries of the information derived from the
            application of Annexes VII to XI shall be included.

12.2.       Mobility

            The potential of the substance or the appropriate constituents of a preparation1, if released
            to the environment, to transport to groundwater or far from the site of release.

            Relevant data might include:

            –     known or predicted distribution to environmental compartments,

            –     surface tension,

            –     absorption/desorption.

            For other physicochemical properties see heading 9.




1
        This information cannot be given for the preparation because it is substance specific. It
        should therefore be given, where available and appropriate, for each constituent substance in
        the preparation which is required to be listed in the Safety Data Sheet according to the rules
        under Section 3 of this Annex.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/289


12.3.    Persistence and degradability

         The potential of the substance or the appropriate constituents of a preparation1 to degrade
         in relevant environmental media, either through biodegradation or other processes such as
         oxidation or hydrolysis. Degradation half lives shall be quoted where available. The
         potential of the substance or appropriate constituents of a preparation1 to degrade in
         sewage treatment plants shall also be mentioned.

12.4.    Bioaccumulative potential

         The potential of the substance or the appropriate constituents of a preparation1 to
         accumulate in biota and, eventually, to pass through the food chain, with reference to the
         octanol-water partition coefficient (Kow) and bioconcentration factor (BCF), if available.

12.5.    Results of PBT assessment

         Where a Chemical Safety Report is required, the results of the PBT assessment as set in the
         Chemical Safety Report shall be given.

12.6.    Other adverse effects

         If available, include information on any other adverse effects on the environment,
         e.g. ozone depletion potential, photochemical ozone creation potential, endocrine
         disrupting potential and/or global warming potential.
L 396/290            EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Remarks

            Ensure that information relevant to the environment is provided under other headings of
            the Safety Data Sheet, especially advice for controlled release, accidental release measures,
            transport and disposal considerations under headings 6, 7, 13, 14 and 15.

13.         DISPOSAL CONSIDERATIONS

            If the disposal of the substance or preparation (surplus or waste resulting from the
            foreseeable use) presents a danger, a description of these residues and information on their
            safe handling shall be given.

            Specify the appropriate methods of disposal of both the substance or preparation and any
            contaminated packaging (incineration, recycling, landfilling, etc.)

            Where a Chemical Safety Report is required, the information on the waste management
            measures that adequately control exposure of humans and the environment to the substance
            shall be consistent with the exposure scenarios set out in the annex to the Safety Data
            Sheet.

            Note

            Refer to any relevant Community provisions relating to waste. In their absence, it is useful
            to remind the user that national or regional provisions may be in force.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/291


14.      TRANSPORT INFORMATION

         Indicate any special precautions which a user needs to be aware of or needs to comply with
         in connection with transport or conveyance either within or outside his premises. Where
         relevant, provide information on the transport classification for each of the modal
         regulations: IMDG (sea), ADR (Council Directive 94/55/EC of 21 November 1994 on the
         approximation of the laws of the Member States with regard to the transport of dangerous
         goods by road1), RID (Council Directive 96/49/EC of 23 July 1996 on the approximation
         of the laws of the Member States with regard to the transport of dangerous goods by rail2),
         ICAO/IATA (air). This might include inter alia:

         –     UN number,

         –     class,

         –     proper shipping name,

         –     packing group,

         –     marine pollutant,

         –     other applicable information.




1
       OJ L 319, 12.12.1994, p. 7. Directive as last amended by Commission
       Directive 2004/111/EC (OJ L 365, 10.12.2004, p. 25).
2
       OJ L 235, 17.9.1996, p. 25. Directive as last amended by Commission
       Directive 2004/110/EC (OJ L 365, 10.12.2004, p. 24).
L 396/292           EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


15.         REGULATORY INFORMATION

            Indicate if a Chemical Safety Assessment has been carried out for the substance (or a
            substance in the preparation).

            Give the health, safety and environmental information shown on the label according to
            Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC.

            If the substance or preparation covered by this safety data sheet is the subject of specific
            provisions in relation to protection of man or the environment at Community level
            (e.g. authorisations given under Title VII or restrictions under Title VIII) these provisions
            shall, as far as is possible, be stated.

            Also mention, where possible, the national laws which implement these provisions and any
            other national measures that may be relevant.

16.         OTHER INFORMATION

            Indicate any other information which the supplier assesses as being of importance for the
            health and safety of the user and for the protection of the environment, for example:

            –     list of relevant R phrases. Write out the full text of any R phrases referred to under
                  headings 2 and 3 of the Safety Data Sheet,

            –     training advice,

            –     recommended restrictions on use (i.e. non-statutory recommendations by supplier),
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                   L 396/293


         –     further information (written references and/or technical contact point),

         –     sources of key data used to compile the Safety Data Sheet.

         For a revised Safety Data Sheet, indicate clearly the information, which has been added,
         deleted or revised (unless this has been indicated elsewhere).
L 396/294           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


                                                 ANNEX III

             CRITERIA FOR SUBSTANCES REGISTERED IN QUANTITIES BETWEEN
                                            1 AND 10 TONNES

Criteria for substances registered between 1 and 10 tonnes, with reference to Article 12(1)(a)
and (b):

(a)         substances for which it is predicted (ie by the application of (Q)SARs or other evidence)
            that they are likely to meet the criteria for category 1 or 2 classification for carcinogenicity,
            mutagenicity or reproductive toxicity or the criteria in Annex XIII,

(b)         substances:

            (i)    with dispersive or diffuse use(s) particularly where such substances are used in
                   consumer preparations or incorporated into consumer articles; and

            (ii)   for which it is predicted (i.e. by application of (Q)SARs or other evidence) that they
                   are likely to meet the classification criteria for any human health or environmental
                   effects endpoints under Directive 67/548/EEC.
30.12.2006    EN                Official Journal of the European Union              L 396/295


                                              ANNEX IV

                   EXEMPTIONS FROM THE OBLIGATION TO REGISTER
                         IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 2(7)(a)

 EINECS No                    Name/Group                                 CAS No

  200-061-5   D-glucitol C6H14O6                                         50-70-4

  200-066-2   Ascorbic acid C6H8O6                                       50-81-7

  200-075-1   Glucose C6H12O6                                            50-99-7

  200-294-2   L-lysine C6H14N2O2                                         56-87-1

  200-312-9   Palmitic acid, pure C16H32O2                               57-10-3

  200-313-4   Stearic acid, pure C18H36O2                                57-11-4

  200-334-9   Sucrose, pure C12H22O11                                    57-50-1

  200-405-4   α-tocopheryl acetate C31H52O3                              58-95-7

  200-432-1   DL-methionine C5H11NO2S                                    59-51-8

  200-711-8   D-mannitol C6H14O6                                         69-65-8

  201-771-8   1-sorbose C6H12O6                                          87-79-6

  204-007-1   Oleic acid, pure C18H34O2                                  112-80-1
L 396/296     EN                 Official Journal of the European Union               30.12.2006


 EINECS No                     Name/Group                                 CAS No

  204-664-4   Glycerol stearate, pure C21H42O4                            123-94-4

  204-696-9   Carbon dioxide CO2                                          124-38-9

  205-278-9   Calcium pantothenate, D-form C9H17NO5.1/2Ca                 137-08-6

  205-582-1   Lauric acid, pure C12H24O2                                  143-07-7

  205-590-5   Potassium oleate C18H34O2K                                  143-18-0

  205-756-7   DL-phenylalanine C9H11NO2                                   150-30-1

  208-407-7   Sodium gluconate C6H12O7.Na                                 527-07-1

  212-490-5   Sodium stearate, pure C18H36O2.Na                           822-16-2

  215-279-6   Limestone                                                   1317-65-3

              A noncombustible solid characteristic of
              sedimentary rock. It consists primarily of calcium
              carbonate


  215-665-4   Sorbitan oleate C24H44O6                                    1338-43-8
30.12.2006    EN                   Official Journal of the European Union               L 396/297


 EINECS No                       Name/Group                                 CAS No

  216-472-8   Calcium distearate, pure C18H36O2.1/2Ca                       1592-23-0

  231-147-0   Argon Ar                                                      7440-37-1

  231-153-3   Carbon C                                                      7440-44-0

  231-783-9   Nitrogen N2                                                   7727-37-9

   31-791-2   Water, distilled, conductivity or of similar purity           7732-18-5
              H2O

  231-955-3   Graphite C                                                    7782-42-5

  232-273-9   Sunflower oil                                                 8001-21-6

              Extractives and their physically modified
              derivatives. It consists primarily of the glycerides of
              the fatty acids linoleic, and oleic.
              (Helianthus annuus, Compositae).
L 396/298     EN                   Official Journal of the European Union               30.12.2006


 EINECS No                       Name/Group                                 CAS No

  232-274-4   Soybean oil                                                   8001-22-7

              Extractives and their physically modified
              derivatives. It consists primarily of the glycerides of
              the fatty acids linoleic, oleic, palmitic and stearic
              (Soja hispida, Leguminosae).


  232-276-5   Safflower oil                                                 8001-23-8

              Extractives and their physically modified
              derivatives. It consists primarily of the glycerides of
              the fatty acid linoleic (Carthamus tinctorius,
              Compositae).


  232-278-6   Linseed oil                                                   8001-26-1

              Extractives and their physically modified
              derivatives. It consists primarily of the glycerides of
              the fatty acids linoleic, linolenic and oleic
              (Linum usitatissimum, Linaceae).


  232-281-2   Corn oil                                                      8001-30-7

              Extractives and their physically modified
              derivatives. It consists primarily of the glycerides of
              the fatty acids linoleic, oleic, palmitic and stearic.
              (Zea mays, Gramineae).
30.12.2006    EN                   Official Journal of the European Union               L 396/299


 EINECS No                      Name/Group                                  CAS No

  232-293-8   Castor Oil                                                    8001-79-4

              Extractives and their physically modified
              derivatives. It consists primarily of the glycerides of
              the fatty acid ricinoleic (Ricinus communis,
              Euphorbiaceae).


  232-299-0   Rape oil                                                      8002-13-9

              Extractives and their physically modified
              derivatives. It consists primarily of the glycerides of
              the fatty acids erucic, linoleic and oleic
              (Brassica napus, Cruciferae).


  232-307-2   Lecithins                                                     8002-43-5

              The complex combination of diglycerides of fatty
              acids linked to the choline ester of phosphoric acid.


  232-436-4   Syrups, hydrolyzed starch                                     8029-43-4

              A complex combination obtained by the hydrolysis
              of cornstarch by the action of acids or enzymes. It
              consists primarily of d-glucose, maltose and
              maltodextrins.
L 396/300     EN                    Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


 EINECS No                      Name/Group                                    CAS No

  232-442-7   Tallow, hydrogenated                                           8030-12-4

  232-675-4   Dextrin                                                        9004-53-9

  232-679-6   Starch                                                         9005-25-8

              High-polymeric carbohydrate material usually
              derived form cereal grains such as corn, wheat and
              sorghum, and from roots and tubers such as
              potatoes and tapioca. Includes starch which has
              been pregelatinised by heating in the presence of
              water.


  232-940-4   Maltodextrin                                                   9050-36-6

  234-328-2   Vitamin A                                                      11103-57-4

  238-976-7   Sodium D-gluconate C6H12O7.xNa                                 14906-97-9

  248-027-9   D-glucitol monostearate C24H48O7                               26836-47-5

  262-988-1   Fatty acids, coco, Me esters                                   61788-59-8

  262-989-7   Fatty acids, tallow, Me esters                                 61788-61-2

  263-060-9   Fatty acids, castor-oil                                        61789-44-4

  263-129-3   Fatty acids, tallow                                            61790-37-2

  265-995-8   Cellulose Pulp                                                 65996-61-4
30.12.2006    EN                     Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/301


 EINECS No                          Name/Group                                 CAS No

  266-925-9   Fatty acids, C12-18                                             67701-01-3

              This substance is identified by SDA Substance
              Name: C12-C18 alkyl carboxylic acid and SDA
              Reporting Number: 16-005-00.


  266-928-5   Fatty acids C16-18                                              67701-03-5

              This substance is identified by SDA Substance
              Name: C16-C18 alkyl carboxylic acid and SDA
              Reporting Number: 19-005-00.


  266-929-0   Fatty acids, C8-18 and C18-unsaturated.                         67701-05-7

              This substance is identified by SDA Substance
              Name: C8-C18 and C18 unsaturated alkyl carboxylic
              acid and SDA Reporting Number: 01-005-00.


  266-930-6   Fatty acids, C14-18 and C16-18-unsaturated.                     67701-06-8

              This substance is identified by SDA Substance
              Name: C14-C18 and C16-C18 unsaturated alkyl
              carboxylic acid and SDA Reporting
              Number: 04-005-00


  266-932-7   Fatty acids, C16-C18 and C18-unsaturated.                       67701-08-0

              This substance is identified by SDA Substance
              Name: C16-C18 and C18 unsaturated alkyl carboxylic
              acid and SDA Reporting Number: 11-005-00
L 396/302     EN                    Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


 EINECS No                         Name/Group                                 CAS No

  266-948-4   Glycerides, C16-18 and C18-unsaturated.                        67701-30-8

              This substance is identified by SDA Substance
              Name: C16-C18 and C18 unsaturated trialkyl
              glyceride and SDA Reporting Number: 11-001-00.


  267-007-0   Fatty acids, C14-18 and C16-18-unsaturated., Me esters         67762-26-9

              This substance is identified by SDA Substance
              Name: C14-C18 and C16-C18 unsaturated alkyl
              carboxylic acid methyl ester and SDA Reporting
              Number: 04-010-00.


  267-013-3   Fatty acids, C6-12                                             67762-36-1

              This substance is identified by SDA Substance
              Name: C6-C12 alkyl carboxylic acid and SDA
              Reporting Number: 13-005-00.


  268-099-5   Fatty acids, C14-22 and C16-22 unsaturated.                    68002-85-7

              This substance is identified by SDA Substance
              Name: C14-C22 and C16-C22 unsaturated alkyl
              carboxylic acid and SDA Reporting
              Number: 07-005-00


  268-616-4   Syrups, corn, dehydrated                                       68131-37-3

  269-657-0   Fatty acids, soya                                              68308-53-2

  269-658-6   Glycerides, tallow mono-, di- and tri-,                        68308-54-3
              hydrogenated
30.12.2006    EN                     Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/303


 EINECS No                          Name/Group                                 CAS No

  270-298-7   Fatty acids, C14-22                                             68424-37-3

  270-304-8   Fatty acids, linseed-oil                                        68424-45-3

  270-312-1   Glycerides, C16-18 and C18-unsaturated. mono- and               68424-61-3
              di-

              This substance is identified by SDA Substance
              Name: C16-C18 and C18 unsaturated alkyl and

              C16-C18 and C18 unsaturated dialkyl glyceride and
              SDA Reporting Number: 11-002-00.


  288-123-8   Glycerides, C10-18                                              85665-33-4

  292-771-7   Fatty acids, C12-14                                             90990-10-6

  292-776-4   Fatty acids, C12-18 and C18-unsaturated.                        90990-15-1

  296-916-5   Fatty acids, rape-oil, erucic acid-low                          93165-31-2
L 396/304          EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


                                                   ANNEX V

                        EXEMPTIONS FROM THE OBLIGATION TO REGISTER
                               IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 2(7)(b)

1.          Substances which result from a chemical reaction that occurs incidental to exposure of
            another substance or article to environmental factors such as air, moisture, microbial
            organisms or sunlight.

2.          Substances which result from a chemical reaction that occurs incidental to storage of
            another substance, preparation or article.

3.          Substances which result from a chemical reaction occurring upon end use of other
            substances, preparations or articles and which are not themselves manufactured, imported
            or placed on the market.

4.          Substances which are not themselves manufactured, imported or placed on the market and
            which result from a chemical reaction that occurs when:

            (a)   a stabiliser, colorant, flavouring agent, antioxidant, filler, solvent, carrier, surfactant,
                  plasticiser, corrosion inhibitor, antifoamer or defoamer, dispersant, precipitation
                  inhibitor, desiccant, binder, emulsifier, de-emulsifier, dewatering agent,
                  agglomerating agent, adhesion promoter, flow modifier, pH neutraliser, sequesterant,
                  coagulant, flocculant, fire retardant, lubricant, chelating agent, or quality control
                  reagent functions as intended; or

            (b)   a substance solely intended to provide a specific physicochemical characteristic
                  functions as intended.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/305


5.       By-products, unless they are imported or placed on the market themselves.

6.       Hydrates of a substance or hydrated ions, formed by association of a substance with water,
         provided that the substance has been registered by the manufacturer or importer using this
         exemption.

7.       The following substances which occur in nature, if they are not chemically modified.

         Minerals, ores, ore concentrates, cement clinker, natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas,
         natural gas condensate, process gases and components thereof, crude oil, coal, coke.

8.       Substances occurring in nature other than those listed under paragraph 7, if they are not
         chemically modified, unless they meet the criteria for classification as dangerous according
         to Directive 67/548/EEC.

9.       Basic elemental substances for which hazards and risks are already well known:

         hydrogen, oxygen, noble gases (argon, helium, neon, xenon), nitrogen.
L 396/306        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


                                              ANNEX VI

              INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 10

                                          GUIDANCE NOTE
               ON FULFILLING THE REQUIREMENTS OF ANNEXES VI TO XI

Annexes VI to XI specify the information that shall be submitted for registration and evaluation
purposes according to Articles 10, 12, 13, 40, 41 and 46. For the lowest tonnage level, the standard
requirements are in Annex VII, and every time a new tonnage level is reached, the requirements of
the corresponding Annex have to be added. For each registration the precise information
requirements will differ, according to tonnage, use and exposure. The Annexes shall thus be
considered as a whole, and in conjunction with the overall requirements of registration, evaluation
and the duty of care.

STEP 1 – GATHER AND SHARE EXISTING INFORMATION

The registrant should gather all existing available test data on the substance to be registered, this
would include a literature search for relevant information on the substance. Wherever practicable,
registrations should be submitted jointly, in accordance with Articles 11 or 19. This will enable test
data to be shared, thereby avoiding unnecessary testing and reducing costs. The registrant should
also collect all other available and relevant information on the substance regardless whether testing
for a given endpoint is required or not at the specific tonnage level. This should include information
from alternative sources (e.g. from (Q)SARs, read-across from other substances, in vivo and in vitro
testing, epidemiological data) which may assist in identifying the presence or absence of hazardous
properties of the substance and which can in certain cases replace the results of animal tests.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/307


In addition, information on exposure, use and risk management measures in accordance with
Article 10 and this Annex should be collected. Considering all this information together, the
registrant will be able to determine the need to generate further information.

STEP 2 – CONSIDER INFORMATION NEEDS

The registrant shall identify what information is required for the registration. First, the relevant
Annex or Annexes to be followed shall be identified, according to tonnage. These Annexes set out
the standard information requirements, but shall be considered in conjunction with Annex XI,
which allows variation from the standard approach, where it can be justified. In particular,
information on exposure, use and risk management measures shall be considered at this stage in
order to determine the information needs for the substance.

STEP 3 – IDENTIFY INFORMATION GAPS

The registrant shall then compare the information needs for the substance with the information
already available and identify where there are gaps. It is important at this stage to ensure that the
available data is relevant and has sufficient quality to fulfil the requirements.

STEP 4 – GENERATE NEW DATA/PROPOSE TESTING STRATEGY

In some cases it will not be necessary to generate new data. However, where there is an information
gap that needs to be filled, new data shall be generated (Annexes VII and VIII), or a testing strategy
shall be proposed (Annexes IX and X), depending on the tonnage. New tests on vertebrates shall
only be conducted or proposed as a last resort when all other data sources have been exhausted.

In some cases, the rules set out in Annexes VII to XI may require certain tests to be undertaken
earlier than or in addition to the standard requirements.
L 396/308          EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


NOTES

Note 1: If it is not technically possible, or if it does not appear scientifically necessary to give
information, the reasons shall be clearly stated, in accordance with the relevant provisions.

Note 2: The registrant may wish to declare that certain information submitted in the registration
dossier is commercially sensitive and its disclosure might harm him commercially. If this is the
case, he shall list the items and provide a justification.

INFORMATION REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 10(a) (i) TO (v)

1.          GENERAL REGISTRANT INFORMATION

1.1.        Registrant

1.1.1.      Name, address, telephone number, fax number and e-mail address

1.1.2.      Contact person

1.1.3.      Location of the registrant's production and own use site(s), as appropriate

1.2.        Joint submission of data

            Articles 11 or 19 foresee that parts of the registration may be submitted by a lead registrant
            on behalf of other registrants.
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/309


         In this case, the lead registrant shall identify the other registrants specifying:

         –     their name, address, telephone number, fax number and e-mail address,

         –     parts of the present registration which apply to other registrants.

         Mention the number(s) given in this Annex or Annexes VII to X, as appropriate.

         Any other registrant shall identify the lead registrant submitting on his behalf specifying:

         –     his name, address, telephone number, fax number and e-mail address,

         –     parts of the registration which are submitted by the lead registrant.

         Mention the number(s) given in this Annex or Annexes VII to X, as appropriate.

1.3      Third party appointed under Article 4

1.3.1.   Name, address, telephone number, fax number and e-mail address

1.3.2.   Contact person

2.       IDENTIFICATION OF THE SUBSTANCE

         For each substance, the information given in this section shall be sufficient to enable each
         substance to be identified. If it is not technically possible or if it does not appear
         scientifically necessary to give information on one or more of the items below, the reasons
         shall be clearly stated.

2.1.     Name or other identifier of each substance
L 396/310          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


2.1.1.      Name(s) in the IUPAC nomenclature or other international chemical name(s)

2.1.2.      Other names (usual name, trade name, abbreviation)

2.1.3.      EINECS or ELINCs number (if available and appropriate)

2.1.4.      CAS name and CAS number (if available)

2.1.5.      Other identity code (if available)

2.2.        Information related to molecular and structural formula of each substance

2.2.1.      Molecular and structural formula (including Smiles notation, if available)

2.2.2.      Information on optical activity and typical ratio of (stereo) isomers (if applicable and
            appropriate)

2.2.3.      Molecular weight or molecular weight range

2.3.        Composition of each substance

2.3.1.      Degree of purity (%)

2.3.2.      Nature of impurities, including isomers and by-products

2.3.3.      Percentage of (significant) main impurities

2.3.4.      Nature and order of magnitude (… ppm, … %) of any additives (e.g. stabilising agents or
            inhibitors)
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/311


2.3.5.   Spectral data (ultra-violet, infra-red, nuclear magnetic resonance or mass spectrum)

2.3.6.   High-pressure liquid chromatogram, gas chromatogram

2.3.7.   Description of the analytical methods or the appropriate bibliographical references for the
         identification of the substance and, where appropriate, for the identification of impurities
         and additives. This information shall be sufficient to allow the methods to be reproduced.

3.       INFORMATION ON MANUFACTURE AND USE(S) OF THE SUBSTANCE(S)

3.1.     Overall manufacture, quantities used for production of an article that is subject to
         registration, and/or imports in tonnes per registrant per year in:

         The calendar year of the registration (estimated quantity)

3.2.     In the case of a manufacturer or producer of articles: Brief description of the technological
         process used in manufacture or production of articles

         Precise details of the process, particularly those of a commercially sensitive nature, are not
         required.

3.3.     An indication of the tonnage used for his own use(s)

3.4.     Form (substance, preparation or article) and/or physical state under which the substance is
         made available to downstream users. Concentration or concentration range of the substance
         in preparations made available to downstream users and quantities of the substance in
         articles made available to downstream users.
L 396/312           EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


3.5.        Brief general description of the identified use(s)

3.6.        Information on waste quantities and composition of waste resulting from manufacture of
            the substance, the use in articles and identified uses

3.7.        Uses advised against (see Safety Data Sheet heading 16)

            Where applicable, an indication of the uses, which the registrant advises against and why
            (i.e. non-statutory recommendations by supplier). This need not be an exhaustive list.

4.          CLASSIFICATION AND LABELLING

4.1.        The hazard classification of the substance(s), resulting from the application of Articles 4
            and 6 of Directive 67/548/EEC;

            In addition, for each entry, the reasons why no classification is given for an endpoint
            should be provided (i.e. if data are lacking, inconclusive, or conclusive but not sufficient
            for classification);

4.2.        The resulting hazard label for the substance(s), resulting from the application of
            Articles 23, 24 and 25 of Directive 67/548/EEC;

4.3.        Specific concentration limits, where applicable, resulting from the application of
            Article 4(4) of Directive 67/548/EEC and Articles 4 to 7 of Directive 1999/45/EC.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                   L 396/313


5.       GUIDANCE ON SAFE USE CONCERNING:

         This information shall be consistent with that in the Safety Data Sheet, where such a Safety
         Data Sheet is required according to Article 31.

5.1.     First-aid measures (Safety Data Sheet heading 4)

5.2.     Fire-fighting measures (Safety Data Sheet heading 5)

5.3.     Accidental release measures (Safety Data Sheet heading 6)

5.4.     Handling and Storage (Safety Data Sheet heading 7)

5.5.     Transport information (Safety Data Sheet heading 14)

         Where a Chemical Safety Report is not required, the following additional information is
         required:

5.6.     Exposure Controls/Personal Protection (Safety Data Sheet heading 8)

5.7.     Stability and Reactivity (Safety Data Sheet heading 10)

5.8.     Disposal considerations

5.8.1.   Disposal considerations (Safety Data Sheet heading 13)

5.8.2.   Information on recycling and methods of disposal for industry

5.8.3.   Information on recycling and methods of disposal for the public
L 396/314          EN                Official Journal of the European Union   30.12.2006


6.          INFORMATION ON EXPOSURE FOR SUBSTANCES REGISTERED IN
            QUANTITIES BETWEEN 1 AND 10 TONNES PER YEAR PER MANUFATCURER
            OR IMPORTER

6.1.        Main use category:

6.1.1.      (a)   industrial use and/or

            (b)   professional use and/or

            (c)   consumer use

6.1.2.      Specification for industrial and professional use:

            (a)   used in closed system and/or

            (b)   use resulting in inclusion into or onto matrix and/or

            (c)   non-dispersive use and/or

            (d)   dispersive use

6.2.        Significant route(s) of exposure:

6.2.1.      Human exposure:

            (a)   oral and/or

            (b)   dermal and/or

            (c)   inhalatory
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union   L 396/315


6.2.2.   Environmental exposure

         (a)   water and/or

         (b)   air and/or

         (c)   solid waste and/or

         (d)   soil

6.3.     Pattern of exposure:

         (a)   accidental/infrequent and/or

         (b)   occasional and/or

         (c)   continuous/frequent
L 396/316          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


                                                ANNEX VII

                STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBSTANCES
        MANUFACTURED OR IMPORTED IN QUANTITIES OF 1 TONNE OR MORE1

Column 1 of this Annex establishes the standard information required for:

(a)         non-phase-in substances manufactured or imported in quantities of 1 to 10 tonnes;

(b)         phase-in substances manufactured or imported in quantities of 1 to 10 tonnes and meeting
            the criteria in Annex III in accordance with Article 12(1)(a) and (b); and

(c)         substances manufactured or imported in quantities of 10 tonnes or more.

Any other relevant physicochemical, toxicological and ecotoxicological information that is
available shall be provided. For substances not meeting the criteria in Annex III only the
physicochemical requirements as set out in section 7 of this Annex are required.

Column 2 of this Annex lists specific rules according to which the required standard information
may be omitted, replaced by other information, provided at a different stage or adapted in another
way. If the conditions are met under which column 2 of this Annex allows adaptations, the
registrant shall clearly state this fact and the reasons for each adaptation under the appropriate
headings in the registration dossier.




1
       This Annex shall apply to producers of articles that are required to register in accordance
       with Article 7 and to other downstream users that are required to carry out tests under this
       Regulation adapted as necessary.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/317


In addition to these specific rules, a registrant may adapt the required standard information set out
in column 1 of this Annex according to the general rules contained in Annex XI with the exception
of section 3 on substance-tailored exposure waiving. In this case as well, he shall clearly state the
reasons for any decision to adapt the standard information under the appropriate headings in the
registration dossier referring to the appropriate specific rule(s) in column 2 or in Annex XI1.

Before new tests are carried out to determine the properties listed in this Annex, all available
in vitro data, in vivo data, historical human data, data from valid (Q)SARs and data from
structurally related substances (read-across approach) shall be assessed first. In vivo testing with
corrosive substances at concentration/dose levels causing corrosivity shall be avoided. Prior to
testing, further guidance on testing strategies should be consulted in addition to this Annex.

When, for certain endpoints, information is not provided for other reasons than those mentioned in
column 2 of this Annex or in Annex XI, this fact and the reasons shall also be clearly stated.




1
       Note: conditions for not requiring a specific test that are set out in the appropriate test
       methods in the Commission Regulation on test methods as specified in Article 13(3) that are
       not repeated in column 2, also apply.
L 396/318        EN                                   Official Journal of the European Union                                                         30.12.2006


7.     INFORMATION ON THE PHYSICOCHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF THE SUBSTANCE

                          COLUMN 1                                                                 COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

7.1.   State of the substance at 20oC and 101,3 kPa

7.2.   Melting/freezing point                         7.2.     The study does not need to be conducted below a lower limit of -20 C.

7.3.   Boiling point                                  7.3.     The study does not need to be conducted:

                                                      –        for gases; or

                                                      –      for solids which either melt above 300°C or decompose before boiling. In such cases the
                                                             boiling point under reduced pressure may be estimated or measured; or

                                                      –      for substances which decompose before boiling (e.g. auto-oxidation, rearrangement,
                                                             degradation, decomposition, etc.).

7.4.   Relative density                               7.4.     The study does not need to be conducted if:

                                                      –      the substance is only stable in solution in a particular solvent and the solution density is
                                                             similar to that of the solvent. In such cases, an indication of whether the solution density is
                                                             higher or lower than the solvent density is sufficient; or

                                                      –      the substance is a gas. In this case, an estimation based on calculation shall be made from
                                                             its molecular weight and the Ideal Gas Laws.
30.12.2006      EN                             Official Journal of the European Union                                                           L 396/319


                          COLUMN 1                                                          COLUMN 2

         STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                            SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

7.5.   Vapour pressure                         7.5.     The study does not need to be conducted if the melting point is above 300°C.

                                               If the melting point is between 200°C and 300°C, a limit value based on measurement or a
                                               recognised calculation method is sufficient.

7.6.   Surface tension                         7.6.     The study need only be conducted if:

                                               –        based on structure, surface activity is expected or can be predicted; or

                                               –        surface activity is a desired property of the material.

                                               If the water solubility is below 1 mg/l at 20°C the test does not need to be conducted.

7.7.   Water solubility                        7.7.     The study does not need to be conducted if:

                                               –        the substance is hydrolytically unstable at pH 4, 7 and 9 (half-life less than 12 hours); or

                                               –        the substance is readily oxidisable in water.

                                               If the substance appears "insoluble" in water, a limit test up to the detection limit of the analytical
                                               method shall be performed.

7.8.   Partition coefficient n-octanol/water   7.8.   The study does not need to be conducted if the substance is inorganic. If the test cannot be
L 396/320        EN                         Official Journal of the European Union                                                         30.12.2006


                      COLUMN 1                                                           COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                      SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

                                                   performed (e.g. the substance decomposes, has a high surface activity, reacts violently
                                                   during the performance of the test or does not dissolve in water or in octanol, or it is not
                                                   possible to obtain a sufficiently pure substance), a calculated value for log P as well as
                                                   details of the calculation method shall be provided.

7.9.   Flash-point                          7.9.     The study does not need to be conducted if:

                                                     –        the substance is inorganic; or

                                                     –        the substance only contains volatile organic components with flash-points
                                                              above 100°C for aqueous solutions; or

                                                     –        the estimated flash-point is above 200°C; or

                                                     –        the flash-point can be accurately predicted by interpolation from existing
                                                              characterised materials.
30.12.2006      EN                       Official Journal of the European Union                                                        L 396/321


                       COLUMN 1                                                      COLUMN 2

         STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                      SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

7.10.   Flammability                     7.10.    The study does not need to be conducted:

                                                  –        if the substance is a solid which possesses explosive or pyrophoric properties.
                                                           These properties should always be considered before considering flammability;
                                                           or

                                                  –        for gases, if the concentration of the flammable gas in a mixture with inert gases
                                                           is so low that, when mixed with air, the concentration is all time below the lower
                                                           limit; or

                                                  –        for substances which spontaneously ignite when in contact with air.
L 396/322        EN                         Official Journal of the European Union                                                         30.12.2006


                         COLUMN 1                                                       COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                      SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

7.11.   Explosive properties                7.11.    The study does not need to be conducted if:

                                                     –        there are no chemical groups associated with explosive properties present in the
                                                              molecule; or

                                                     –        the substance contains chemical groups associated with explosive properties
                                                              which include oxygen and the calculated oxygen balance is less than –200; or

                                                     –        the organic substance or a homogenous mixture of organic substances contains
                                                              chemical groups associated with explosive properties, but the exothermic
                                                              decomposition energy is less than 500 J/g and the onset of exothermic
                                                              decomposition is below 500 ºC; or

                                                     –        for mixtures of inorganic oxidising substances (UN Division 5.1) with organic
                                                              materials, the concentration of the inorganic oxidising substance is:

                                            –        less than 15 %, by mass, if assigned to UN Packaging Group I (high hazard) or II
                                            (medium hazard)

                                            –        less than 30 %, by mass, if assigned to UN Packaging Group III (low hazard).

                                            Note: Neither a test for propagation of detonation nor a test for sensitivity to detonative shock is
                                            required if the exothermic decomposition energy of organic materials is less than 800 J/g.
30.12.2006       EN                      Official Journal of the European Union                                                        L 396/323


                         COLUMN 1                                                    COLUMN 2

         STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                      SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

7.12.   Self-ignition temperature        7.12.    The study does not need to be conducted:

                                                  –      if the substance is explosive or ignites spontaneously with air at room temperature;
                                                         or

                                                  –      for liquids non flammable in air, e.g. no flash point up to 200°C; or

                                                  –      for gases having no flammable range; or

                                                  –      for solids, if the substance has a melting point < 160°C, or if preliminary
                                                         results exclude self-heating of the substance up to 400°C.

7.13.   Oxidising properties             7.13.    The study does not need to be conducted if:

                                                  –      the substance is explosive; or

                                                  –      the substance is highly flammable; or

                                                  –      the substance is an organic peroxide; or

                                                  –      the substance is incapable of reacting exothermically with combustible materials,
                                                         for example on the basis of the chemical structure (e.g. organic substances not
                                                         containing oxygen or halogen atoms and these elements are not chemically bonded
                                                         to nitrogen or oxygen, or inorganic substances not containing oxygen or halogen
                                                         atoms).
L 396/324        EN                         Official Journal of the European Union                                                         30.12.2006


                       COLUMN 1                                                            COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                      SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

                                            The full test does not need to be conducted for solids if the preliminary test clearly indicates that
                                            the test substance has oxidising properties.




                                            Note that as there is no test method to determine the oxidising properties of gaseous mixtures, the
                                            evaluation of these properties must be realised by an estimation method based on the comparison
                                            of the oxidising potential of gases in a mixture with that of the oxidising potential of oxygen in
                                            air.

7.14.   Granulometry                        7.14. The study does not need to be conducted if the substance is marketed or used in a non solid
                                                   or granular form.
30.12.2006        EN                                            Official Journal of the European Union                                                           L 396/325


8.      TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION

                           COLUMN 1                                                                          COLUMN 2

          STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                             SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

8.1.    Skin irritation or skin corrosion                       8.1.     Steps 3 and 4 do not need to be conducted if:

The assessment of this endpoint shall comprise the following             –      the available information indicates that the criteria are met for classification as
consecutive steps:                                                              corrosive to the skin or irritating to eyes; or


(1)     an assessment of the available human and animal data,            –      the substance is flammable in air at room temperature; or

                                                                         –      the substance is classified as very toxic in contact with skin; or
(2)     an assessment of the acid or alkaline reserve,
                                                                         –      an acute toxicity study by the dermal route does not indicate skin irritation up to
(3)     in vitro study for skin corrosion,
                                                                                the limit dose level (2 000 mg/kg body weight).

(4)     in vitro study for skin irritation.
L 396/326         EN                                            Official Journal of the European Union                                                           30.12.2006


                             COLUMN 1                                                                        COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                           SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

8.2.    Eye irritation                                          8.2.     Step 3 does not need to be conducted if:

The assessment of this endpoint shall comprise the following             –      the available information indicates that the criteria are met for classification as
consecutive steps:                                                              corrosive to the skin or irritating to eyes; or


(1)     an assessment of the available human and animal data,            –      the substance is flammable in air at room temperature;


(2)     an assessment of the acid or alkaline reserve,

(3)     in vitro study for eye irritation.

8.3.    Skin sensitisation                                      8.3.     Step 2 does not need to be conducted if:

The assessment of this endpoint shall comprise the following             –      the available information indicates that the substance should be classified for skin
consecutive steps:                                                              sensitisation or corrosivity; or


(1)     an assessment of the available human, animal and                 –      the substance is a strong acid (pH < 2,0) or base (pH > 11,5); or

        alternative data,                                                –      the substance is flammable in air at room temperature.

(2)     In vivo testing.                                        The Murine Local Lymph Node Assay (LLNA) is the first-choice method for in vivo testing. Only
                                                                in exceptional circumstances should another test be used. Justification for the use of another test
                                                                shall be provided.
30.12.2006        EN                                Official Journal of the European Union                                                        L 396/327


                           COLUMN 1                                                              COLUMN 2

          STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                 SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

8.4.     Mutagenicity                               8.4.     Further mutagenicity studies shall be considered in case of a positive result.

8.4.1.   In vitro gene mutation study in bacteria

8.5.     Acute toxicity                             8.5.     The study/ies do(es) not generally need to be conducted if:

                                                             –      the substance is classified as corrosive to the skin.

8.5.1.   By oral route                              The study need not be conducted if a study on acute toxicity by the inhalation route (8.5.2) is
                                                    available.
L 396/328         EN                                                Official Journal of the European Union                                                           30.12.2006


9.      ECOTOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION

                           COLUMN 1                                                                                COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                                SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

9.1.    Aquatic toxicity

9.1.1. Short-term toxicity testing on invertebrates (preferred      9.1.1.    The study does not need to be conducted if:
       species Daphnia)
                                                                              –        there are mitigating factors indicating that aquatic toxicity is unlikely to
The registrant may consider long-term toxicity testing instead of             occur, for instance if the substance is highly insoluble in water or the substance is
short-term.
                                                                              unlikely to cross biological membranes; or

                                                                              –      a long-term aquatic toxicity study on invertebrates is available; or

                                                                              –      adequate information for environmental classification and labelling is available.

                                                                    The long-term aquatic toxicity study on Daphnia (Annex IX, section 9.1.5) shall be considered if
                                                                    the substance is poorly water soluble.

9.1.2. Growth inhibition study aquatic plants (algae preferred)     9.1.2. The study does not need to be conducted if there are mitigating factors indicating that
                                                                             aquatic toxicity is unlikely to occur for instance if the substance is highly insoluble in water
                                                                             or the substance is unlikely to cross biological membranes.
30.12.2006        EN                                        Official Journal of the European Union                                             L 396/329


                         COLUMN 1                                                                       COLUMN 2

          STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                         SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

9.2.     Degradation

9.2.1.   Biotic

9.2.1.1. Ready biodegradability                              9.2.1.1. The study does not need to be conducted if the substance is inorganic.

Any other relevant physicochemical, toxicological and ecotoxicological information that is available shall be provided.
L 396/330        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


                                             ANNEX VIII

STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBSTANCES MANUFACTURED OR
                      IMPORTED IN QUANTITIES OF 10 TONNES OR MORE1

Column 1 of this Annex establishes the standard information required for all substances
manufactured or imported in quantities of 10 tonnes or more in accordance with Article 12(1)(c).
Accordingly, the information required in column 1 of this Annex is additional to that required in
column 1 of Annex VII. Any other relevant physicochemical, toxicological and ecotoxicological
information that is available shall be provided. Column 2 of this Annex lists specific rules according
to which the required standard information may be omitted, replaced by other information, provided
at a different stage or adapted in another way. If the conditions are met under which column 2 of
this Annex allows adaptations, the registrant shall clearly state this fact and the reasons for each
adaptation under the appropriate headings in the registration dossier.

In addition to these specific rules, a registrant may adapt the required standard information set out
in column 1 of this Annex according to the general rules contained in Annex XI. In this case as
well, he shall clearly state the reasons for any decision to adapt the standard information under the
appropriate headings in the registration dossier referring to the appropriate specific rule(s) in
column 2 or in Annex XI2.




1
       This Annex shall apply to producers of articles that are required to register in accordance
       with Article 7 and to other downstream users that are required to carry out tests under this
       Regulation adapted as necessary.
2
       Note: conditions for not requiring a specific test that are set out in the appropriate test
       methods in the Commission Regulation on test methods as specified in Article 13(3) that are
       not repeated in column 2, also apply.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/331


Before new tests are carried out to determine the properties listed in this Annex, all available
in vitro data, in vivo data, historical human data, data from valid (Q)SARs and data from
structurally related substances (read-across approach) shall be assessed first. In vivo testing with
corrosive substances at concentration/dose levels causing corrosivity shall be avoided. Prior to
testing, further guidance on testing strategies should be consulted in addition to this Annex.

When, for certain endpoints, information is not provided for other reasons than those mentioned in
column 2 of this Annex or in Annex XI, this fact and the reasons shall also be clearly stated.
L 396/332          EN                       Official Journal of the European Union                                                             30.12.2006


8.       TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION

                            COLUMN 1                                                      COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                       SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

8.1.     Skin irritation

8.1.1.   In vivo skin irritation            8.1.1.   The study does not need to be conducted if:

                                                     –        the substance is classified as corrosive to the skin or as a skin irritant; or

                                                     –        the substance is a strong acid (pH < 2,0) or base (pH > 11,5); or

                                                     –        the substance is flammable in air at room temperature; or

                                                     –        the substance is classified as very toxic in contact with skin; or

                                                     –        an acute toxicity study by the dermal route does not indicate skin irritation up to
                                                              the limit dose level (2 000 mg/kg body weight).
30.12.2006         EN                                           Official Journal of the European Union                                                           L 396/333


                            COLUMN 1                                                                          COLUMN 2

          STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                             SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

8.2.     Eye irritation

8.2.1.   In vivo eye irritation                                 8.2.1.   The study does not need to be conducted if:

                                                                         –        the substance is classified as irritating to eyes with risk of serious damage to
                                                                                  eyes; or

                                                                         –        the substance is classified as corrosive to the skin and provided that the registrant
                                                                                  classified the substance as eye irritant; or

                                                                         –        the substance is a strong acid (pH < 2,0) or base (pH > 11,5); or

                                                                         –        the substance is flammable in air at room temperature.

8.4.     Mutagenicity

8.4.2.   In vitro cytogenicity study in mammalian cells or in   8.4.2.   The study does not usually need to be conducted
vitro micronucleus study
                                                                         –        if adequate data from an in vivo cytogenicity test are available or

                                                                         –        the substance is known to be carcinogenic category 1 or 2 or mutagenic category
                                                                                  1, 2 or 3.
L 396/334         EN                                             Official Journal of the European Union                                                        30.12.2006


                           COLUMN 1                                                                           COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                            SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

8.4.3.   In vitro gene mutation study in mammalian cells, if a   8.4.3. The study does not usually need to be conducted if adequate data from a reliable in vivo
         negative result in Annex VII, section 8.4.1. and               mammalian gene mutation test are available.
         Annex VIII, section 8.4.2.

                                                                 8.4.   Appropriate in vivo mutagenicity studies shall be considered in case of a positive result in
                                                                        any of the genotoxicity studies in Annex VII or VIII.

8.5.     Acute toxicity                                          8.5.   The study/ies do(es) not generally need to be conducted if:

                                                                        –      the substance is classified as corrosive to the skin.

                                                                 In addition to the oral route (8.5.1), for substances other than gases, the information mentioned
                                                                 under 8.5.2 to 8.5.3 shall be provided for at least one other route. The choice for the second route
                                                                 will depend on the nature of the substance and the likely route of human exposure. If there is only
                                                                 one route of exposure, information for only that route need be provided.

8.5.2.   By inhalation                                           8.5.2. Testing by the inhalation route is appropriate if exposure of humans via inhalation is likely
                                                                        taking into account the vapour pressure of the substance and/or the possibility of exposure
                                                                        to aerosols, particles or droplets of an inhalable size.
30.12.2006        EN                                              Official Journal of the European Union                                                            L 396/335


                           COLUMN 1                                                                               COLUMN 2

          STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                                  SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

8.5.3.   By dermal route                                          8.5.3.       Testing by the dermal route is appropriate if:

                                                                           (1)     inhalation of the substance is unlikely; and

                                                                           (2)     skin contact in production and/or use is likely; and

                                                                           (3)     the physicochemical and toxicological properties suggest potential for a significant
                                                                                   rate of absorption through the skin.

8.6.     Repeated dose toxicity

8.6.1.   Short-term repeated dose toxicity study (28 days), one   8.6.1.       The short-term toxicity study (28 days) does not need to be conducted if:
         species, male and female, most appropriate route of
                                                                           –       a reliable sub-chronic (90 days) or chronic toxicity study is available, provided that
         administration, having regard to the likely route of
                                                                                   an appropriate species, dosage, solvent and route of administration were used; or
         human exposure.

                                                                           –       where a substance undergoes immediate disintegration and there are sufficient data
                                                                                   on the cleavage products; or

                                                                           –       relevant human exposure can be excluded in accordance with Annex XI section 3.
L 396/336        EN                         Official Journal of the European Union                                                       30.12.2006


                      COLUMN 1                                                            COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                       SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

                                            The appropriate route shall be chosen on the following basis:

                                            Testing by the dermal route is appropriate if:

                                            (1)      inhalation of the substance is unlikely; and

                                            (2)      skin contact in production and/or use is likely; and

                                            (3)    the physicochemical and toxicological properties suggest potential for a significant rate of
                                                   absorption through the skin.

                                            Testing by the inhalation route is appropriate if exposure of humans via inhalation is likely taking
                                            into account the vapour pressure of the substance and/or the possibility of exposure to aerosols,
                                            particles or droplets of an inhalable size.
30.12.2006    EN                         Official Journal of the European Union                                                         L 396/337


                   COLUMN 1                                                          COLUMN 2

         STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                       SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

                                         The sub-chronic toxicity study (90 days) (Annex IX, section 8.6.2) shall be proposed by the
                                         registrant if: the frequency and duration of human exposure indicates that a longer term study is
                                         appropriate;

                                         and one of the following conditions is met:

                                         –      other available data indicate that the substance may have a dangerous property that cannot
                                                be detected in a short-term toxicity study; or

                                         –      appropriately designed toxicokinetic studies reveal accumulation of the substance or its
                                                metabolites in certain tissues or organs which would possibly remain undetected in a
                                                short-term toxicity study but which are liable to result in adverse effects after prolonged
                                                exposure.
L 396/338        EN                         Official Journal of the European Union                                                         30.12.2006


                      COLUMN 1                                                           COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                       SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

                                            Further studies shall be proposed by the registrant or may be required by the Agency in
                                            accordance with Article 40 or 41 in case of:

                                            –      failure to identify a NOAEL in the 28 or the 90 days study, unless the reason for the failure
                                                   to identify a NOAEL is absence of adverse toxic effects; or

                                            –      toxicity of particular concern (e.g. serious/severe effects); or

                                            –      indications of an effect for which the available evidence is inadequate for toxicological
                                                   and/or risk characterisation. In such cases it may also be more appropriate to perform
                                                   specific toxicological studies that are designed to investigate these effects
                                                   (e.g. immunotoxicity, neurotoxicity); or

                                            –      the route of exposure used in the initial repeated dose study was inappropriate in relation to
                                                   the expected route of human exposure and route-to-route extrapolation cannot be made; or

                                            –      particular concern regarding exposure (e.g. use in consumer products leading to exposure
                                                   levels which are close to the dose levels at which toxicity to humans may be expected); or

                                            –      effects shown in substances with a clear relationship in molecular structure with the
                                                   substance being studied, were not detected in the 28 or the 90 days study.
30.12.2006        EN                                                 Official Journal of the European Union                                                          L 396/339


                           COLUMN 1                                                                              COLUMN 2

          STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                                  SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

8.7.     Reproductive toxicity                                       8.7.1. This study does not need to be conducted if:

8.7.1.   Screening for reproductive/developmental toxicity, one      –      the substance is known to be a genotoxic carcinogen and appropriate risk management
         species (OECD 421 or 422), if there is no evidence from            measures are implemented; or

         available information on structurally related substances,   –      the substance is known to be a germ cell mutagen and appropriate risk management
         from (Q)SAR estimates or from in vitro methods that                measures are implemented; or
         the substance may be a developmental toxicant
                                                                     –      relevant human exposure can be excluded in accordance with Annex XI section 3; or

                                                                     –      a pre-natal developmental toxicity study (Annex IX, 8.7.2) or a two-generation
                                                                            reproductive toxicity study (Annex IX, section 8.7.3) is available.

                                                                     If a substance is known to have an adverse effect on fertility, meeting the criteria for classification
                                                                     as Repr Cat 1 or 2: R60, and the available data are adequate to support a robust risk assessment,
                                                                     then no further testing for fertility will be necessary. However, testing for development toxicity
                                                                     must be considered.

                                                                     If a substance is known to cause developmental toxicity, meeting the criteria for classification as
                                                                     Repr Cat 1 or 2: R61, and the available data are adequate to support a robust risk assessment, then
                                                                     no further testing for developmental toxicity will be necessary. However, testing for effects on
                                                                     fertility must be considered.
L 396/340         EN                                            Official Journal of the European Union                                                        30.12.2006


                           COLUMN 1                                                                          COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                           SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

                                                                In cases where there are serious concerns about the potential for adverse effects on fertility or
                                                                development, either a pre-natal developmental toxicity study (Annex IX, section 8.7.2) or a
                                                                two-generation reproductive toxicity study (Annex IX, section 8.7.3) may be proposed by the
                                                                registrant instead of the screening study.

8.8.     Toxicokinetics

8.8.1.   Assessment of the toxicokinetic behaviour of the
         substance to the extent that can be derived from the
         relevant available information
30.12.2006        EN                                                  Official Journal of the European Union                                                            L 396/341


9.       ECOTOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION

                           COLUMN 1                                                                                COLUMN 2

          STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                                   SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

9.1.3.   Short-term toxicity testing on fish: The registrant may      9.1.3.   The study does not need to be conducted if:
         consider long-term toxicity testing instead of short-term.
                                                                               –      there are mitigating factors indicating that aquatic toxicity is unlikely to occur, for
                                                                                      instance if the substance is highly insoluble in water or the substance is unlikely to
                                                                                      cross biological membranes; or




                                                                               –      a long-term aquatic toxicity study on fish is available.

                                                                      Long-term aquatic toxicity testing as described in Annex IX shall be considered if the chemical
                                                                      safety assessment according to Annex I indicates the need to investigate further effects on aquatic
                                                                      organisms. The choice of the appropriate test(s) will depend on the results of the chemical safety
                                                                      assessment.

                                                                      The long-term aquatic toxicity study on fish (Annex IX, section 9.1.6) shall be considered if the
                                                                      substance is poorly water soluble.
L 396/342         EN                                       Official Journal of the European Union                                                          30.12.2006


                           COLUMN 1                                                                     COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                      SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

9.1.4.   Activated sludge respiration inhibition testing   9.1.4.   The study does not need to be conducted if:

                                                                    –      there is no emission to a sewage treatment plant; or

                                                                    –      there are mitigating factors indicating that microbial toxicity is unlikely to occur,
                                                                           for instance the substance is highly insoluble in water; or

                                                                    –      the substance is found to be readily biodegradable and the applied test
                                                                           concentrations are in the range of concentrations that can be expected in the
                                                                           influent of a sewage treatment plant.

                                                           The study may be replaced by a nitrification inhibition test if available data show that the
                                                           substance is likely to be an inhibitor of microbial growth or function, in particular nitrifying
                                                           bacteria.

9.2.     Degradation                                       9.2.     Further degradation testing shall be considered if the chemical safety assessment
                                                                    according to Annex I indicates the need to investigate further the degradation of the
                                                                    substance. The choice of the appropriate test(s) will depend on the results of the chemical
                                                                    safety assessment.
30.12.2006         EN                            Official Journal of the European Union                                                            L 396/343


                          COLUMN 1                                                              COLUMN 2

          STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                 SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

9.2.2.   Abiotic

9.2.2.1. Hydrolysis as a function of pH.         9.2.2.1.       The study does not need to be conducted if:

                                                            –       the substance is readily biodegradable; or

                                                            –       the substance is highly insoluble in water.

9.3.     Fate and behaviour in the environment

9.3.1.   Adsorption/desorption screening         9.3.1.     The study does not need to be conducted if:

                                                            –       based on the physicochemical properties the substance can be expected to have a
                                                                    low potential for adsorption (e.g. the substance has a low octanol water partition
                                                                    coefficient); or

                                                            –       the substance and its relevant degradation products decompose rapidly.
L 396/344       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


                                              ANNEX IX

STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBSTANCES MANUFACTURED OR
IMPORTED IN QUANTITIES OF 100 TONNES OR MORE1

At the level of this Annex, the registrant must submit a proposal and a time schedule for fulfilling
the information requirements of this Annex in accordance with Article 12(1)(d).

Column 1 of this Annex establishes the standard information required for all substances
manufactured or imported in quantities of 100 tonnes or more in accordance with Article 12(1)(d).
Accordingly, the information required in column 1 of this Annex is additional to that required in
column 1 of Annexes VII and VIII. Any other relevant physicochemical, toxicological and
ecotoxicological information that is available shall be provided. Column 2 of this Annex lists
specific rules according to which the registrant may propose to omit the required standard
information, replace it by other information, provide it at a later stage or adapt it in another way. If
the conditions are met under which column 2 of this Annex allows an adaptation to be proposed, the
registrant shall clearly state this fact and the reasons for proposing each adaptation under the
appropriate headings in the registration dossier.

In addition to these specific rules, a registrant may propose to adapt the required standard
information set out in column 1 of this Annex according to the general rules contained in Annex XI.
In this case as well, he shall clearly state the reasons for any decision to propose adaptations to the
standard information under the appropriate headings in the registration dossier referring to the
appropriate specific rule(s) in column 2 or in Annex XI2.




1
       This Annex shall apply to producers of articles that are required to register in accordance
       with Article 7 and to other downstream users that are required to carry out tests under this
       Regulation adapted as necessary.
2
       Note: conditions for not requiring a specific test that are set out in the appropriate test
       methods in the Commission Regulation on test methods as specified in Article 13(3) that are
       not repeated in column 2, also apply.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/345


Before new tests are carried out to determine the properties listed in this Annex, all available
in vitro data, in vivo data, historical human data, data from valid (Q)SARs and data from
structurally related substances (read-across approach) shall be assessed first. In vivo testing with
corrosive substances at concentration/dose levels causing corrosivity shall be avoided. Prior to
testing, further guidance on testing strategies should be consulted in addition to this Annex.

When, for certain endpoints, it is proposed not to provide information for other reasons than those
mentioned in column 2 of this Annex or in Annex XI, this fact and the reasons shall also be clearly
stated.
L 396/346           EN                                              Official Journal of the European Union                                                           30.12.2006


7.      INFORMATION ON THE PHYSICOCHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF THE SUBSTANCE

                          COLUMN 1                                                                             COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                            SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

7.15.   Stability in organic solvents and identity of relevant      7.15.    The study does not need to be conducted if the substance is inorganic.
        degradation products

        Only required if stability of the substance is considered
        to be critical.

7.16.   Dissociation constant                                       7.16.    The study does not need to be conducted if:

                                                                    –        the substance is hydrolytically unstable (half-life less than 12 hours) or is
                                                                             readily oxidisable in water; or

                                                                            – it is scientifically not possible to perform the test for instance if the analytical
                                                                             method is not sensitive enough.

7.17.   Viscosity
30.12.2006        EN                                                Official Journal of the European Union                                                            L 396/347


8.       TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION

                           COLUMN 1                                                                           COLUMN 2

         STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                            SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

                                                                    8.4.     If there is a positive result in any of the in vitro genotoxicity studies in Annex VII
                                                                             or VIII and there are no results available from an in vivo study already, an
                                                                             appropriate in vivo somatic cell genotoxicity study shall be proposed by the
                                                                             registrant.

                                                                             If there is a positive result from an in vivo somatic cell study available, the
                                                                             potential for germ cell mutagenicity should be considered on the basis of all
                                                                             available data, including toxicokinetic evidence. If no clear conclusions about germ
                                                                             cell mutagenicity can be made, additional investigations shall be considered.

8.6.     Repeated dose toxicity

8.6.1.   Short-term repeated dose toxicity study (28 days), one
         species, male and female, most appropriate route of
         administration, having regard to the likely route of
         human exposure, unless already provided as part of
         Annex VIII requirements or if tests according to section
         8.6.2 of this Annex is proposed. In this case, Section 3
         of Annex XI shall not apply.
L 396/348         EN                                            Official Journal of the European Union                                                              30.12.2006


                           COLUMN 1                                                                         COLUMN 2

         STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                            SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

8.6.2.   Sub-chronic toxicity study (90-day), one species,      8.6.2.       The sub-chronic toxicity study (90 days) does not need to be conducted if:
         rodent, male and female, most appropriate route of
         administration, having regard to the likely route of            –       a reliable short-term toxicity study (28 days) is available showing severe
         human exposure.
                                                                                 toxicity effects according to the criteria for classifying the substance as R48,
                                                                                 for which the observed NOAEL-28 days, with the application of an
                                                                                 appropriate uncertainty factor, allows the extrapolation towards the
                                                                                 NOAEL-90 days for the same route of exposure; or


                                                                         –       a reliable chronic toxicity study is available, provided that an appropriate
                                                                                 species and route of administration were used; or


                                                                         –       a substance undergoes immediate disintegration and there are sufficient data
                                                                                 on the cleavage products (both for systemic effects and effects at the site of
                                                                                 uptake); or


                                                                         –       the substance is unreactive, insoluble and not inhalable and there is no
                                                                                 evidence of absorption and no evidence of toxicity in a 28-day "limit test",
                                                                                 particularly if such a pattern is coupled with limited human exposure.
30.12.2006   EN                         Official Journal of the European Union                                                          L 396/349


                  COLUMN 1                                                        COLUMN 2

        STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                 SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

                                        The appropriate route shall be chosen on the following basis:

                                        Testing by the dermal route is appropriate if:

                                        (1)      skin contact in production and/or use is likely; and

                                        (2)    the physicochemical properties suggest a significant rate of absorption through the
                                               skin; and

                                        (3)      one of the following conditions is met:

                                        –      toxicity is observed in the acute dermal toxicity test at lower doses than in the oral
                                               toxicity test; or

                                        –      systemic effects or other evidence of absorption is observed in skin and/or eye
                                               irritation studies; or

                                        –      in vitro tests indicate significant dermal absorption; or

                                        –      significant dermal toxicity or dermal penetration is recognised for
                                               structurally-related substances.
L 396/350    EN                         Official Journal of the European Union                                                         30.12.2006


                  COLUMN 1                                                       COLUMN 2

        STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                 SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1




                                        Testing by the inhalation route is appropriate if:

                                        –      exposure of humans via inhalation is likely taking into account the vapour pressure
                                               of the substance and/or the possibility of exposure to aerosols, particles or droplets of
                                               an inhalable size.
30.12.2006   EN                         Official Journal of the European Union                                                          L 396/351


                  COLUMN 1                                                       COLUMN 2

        STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                 SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

                                        Further studies shall be proposed by the registrant or may be required by the Agency in
                                        accordance with Articles 40 or 41 in case of:

                                        –      failure to identify a NOAEL in the 90 days study unless the reason for the failure to
                                               identify a NOAEL is absence of adverse toxic effects; or

                                        –      toxicity of particular concern (e.g. serious/severe effects); or

                                        –      indications of an effect for which the available evidence is inadequate for
                                               toxicological and/or risk characterisation. In such cases it may also be more
                                               appropriate to perform specific toxicological studies that are designed to investigate
                                               these effects (e.g. immunotoxicity, neurotoxicity); or

                                        –      particular concern regarding exposure (e.g. use in consumer products leading to
                                               exposure levels which are close to the dose levels at which toxicity to humans may
                                               be expected).
L 396/352       EN                      Official Journal of the European Union                                                        30.12.2006


                        COLUMN 1                                                 COLUMN 2

        STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                 SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

8.7.   Reproductive toxicity            8.7.     The studies do not need to be conducted if:

                                                 –        the substance is known to be a genotoxic carcinogen and appropriate risk
                                                          management measures are implemented; or

                                                 –        the substance is known to be a germ cell mutagen and appropriate risk
                                                          management measures are implemented; or

                                                 –        the substance is of low toxicological activity (no evidence of toxicity seen
                                                          in any of the tests available), it can be proven from toxicokinetic data that
                                                          no systemic absorption occurs via relevant routes of exposure (e.g.
                                                          plasma/blood concentrations below detection limit using a sensitive
                                                          method and absence of the substance and of metabolites of the substance in
                                                          urine, bile or exhaled air) and there is no or no significant human exposure.
30.12.2006        EN                                               Official Journal of the European Union                                                              L 396/353


                          COLUMN 1                                                                           COLUMN 2

         STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                           SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

                                                                                     If a substance is known to have an adverse effect on fertility, meeting the
                                                                                     criteria for classification as Repr Cat 1 or 2: R60, and the available data are
                                                                                     adequate to support a robust risk assessment, then no further testing for
                                                                                     fertility will be necessary. However, testing for development toxicity must
                                                                                     be considered.

                                                                                     If a substance is known to cause developmental toxicity, meeting the
                                                                                     criteria for classification as Repr Cat 1 or 2: R61, and the available data are
                                                                                     adequate to support a robust risk assessment, then no further testing for
                                                                                     developmental toxicity will be necessary. However, testing for effects on
                                                                                     fertility must be considered.

8.7.2.   Pre-natal developmental toxicity study, one species,      8.7.2.   The study shall be initially performed on one species. A decision on the need to
         most appropriate route of administration, having regard            perform a study at this tonnage level or the next on a second species should be
         to the likely route of human exposure (B.31 of the                 based on the outcome of the first test and all other relevant available data.
         Commission Regulation on test methods as specified in
         Article 13(3) or OECD 414).

8.7.3.   Two-generation reproductive toxicity study,               8.7.3.   The study shall be initially performed on one species. A decision on the need to
         one species, male and female, most appropriate route of            perform a study at this tonnage level or the next on a second species should be
         administration, having regard to the likely route of               based on the outcome of the first test and all other relevant available date.
         human exposure, if the 28-day or 90-day study indicates
         adverse effects on reproductive organs or tissues.
L 396/354             EN                                             Official Journal of the European Union                                                        30.12.2006


9.       ECOTOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION

                            COLUMN 1                                                                             COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                               SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

9.1.     Aquatic toxicity                                               9.1.     Long-term toxicity testing shall be proposed by the registrant if the chemical safety
                                                                                 assessment according to Annex I indicates the need to investigate further the
                                                                                 effects on aquatic organisms. The choice of the appropriate test(s) depends on the
                                                                                 results of the chemical safety assessment.

9.1.5.   Long-term toxicity testing on invertebrates (preferred
         species Daphnia), (unless already provided as part of
         Annex VII requirements)

9.1.6.   Long-term toxicity testing on fish, (unless already
         provided as part of Annex VIII requirements)

The information shall be provided for one of the sections 9.1.6.1,
9.1.6.2 or 9.1.6.3.

9.1.6.2. Fish early-life stage (FELS) toxicity test

9.1.6.2. Fish short-term toxicity test on embryo and sac-fry stages

9.1.6.3. Fish, juvenile growth test
30.12.2006        EN                                             Official Journal of the European Union                                                        L 396/355


                           COLUMN 1                                                                          COLUMN 2

             STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                          SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

9.2.     Degradation                                                9.2.     Further biotic degradation testing shall be proposed by the registrant if the
                                                                             chemical safety assessment according to Annex I indicates the need to investigate
                                                                             further the degradation of the substance and its degradation products. The choice of
                                                                             the appropriate test(s) depends on the results of the chemical safety assessment and
                                                                             may include simulation testing in appropriate media (e.g. water, sediment or soil).

9.2.1.   Biotic

9.2.1.2. Simulation testing on ultimate degradation in surface      9.2.1.2. The study need not be conducted if:
         water
                                                                             –        the substances is highly insoluble in water; or

                                                                             –        the substance is readily biodegradable.
L 396/356           EN                                             Official Journal of the European Union                                          30.12.2006


                              COLUMN 1                                                                          COLUMN 2

             STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                            SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

9.2.1.3. Soil simulation testing (for substances with a high          9.2.1.3. The study need not be conducted:
            potential for adsorption to soil)
                                                                               –        if the substance is readily biodegradable; or

                                                                               –        if direct and indirect exposure of soil is unlikely.

9.2.1.4. Sediment simulation testing (for substances with a high      9.2.1.4. The study need not be conducted:
            potential for adsorption to sediment)
                                                                               –        if the substance is readily biodegradable; or

                                                                               –        if direct and indirect exposure of sediment is unlikely.

9.2.3.   Identification of degradation products                       9.2.3.   Unless the substance is readily biodegradable
30.12.2006        EN                                              Official Journal of the European Union                                                           L 396/357


                            COLUMN 1                                                                           COLUMN 2

             STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                           SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

9.3.     Fate and behaviour in the environment

9.3.2.   Bioaccumulation in aquatic species, preferably fish         9.3.2.   The study need not be conducted if:

                                                                              –        the substance has a low potential for bioaccumulation (for instance a log
                                                                                       Kow < 3) and/or a low potential to cross biological membranes; or

                                                                              –        direct and indirect exposure of the aquatic compartment is unlikely.

9.3.3.   Further information on adsorption/desorption depending      9.3.3.   The study need not be conducted if:
         on the results of the study required in Annex VIII
                                                                              –        based on the physicochemical properties the substance can be expected to
                                                                                       have a low potential for adsorption (e.g. the substance has a low octanol
                                                                                       water partition coefficient); or

                                                                              –        the substance and its degradation products decompose rapidly.
L 396/358         EN                            Official Journal of the European Union                                                             30.12.2006


                            COLUMN 1                                                         COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                          SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

9.4.     Effects on terrestrial organisms          9.4.     These studies do not need to be conducted if direct and indirect exposure of the soil
                                                            compartment is unlikely.

                                                            In the absence of toxicity data for soil organisms, the equilibrium partitioning
                                                            method may be applied to assess the hazard to soil organisms. The choice of the
                                                            appropriate tests depends on the outcome of the chemical safety assessment.

                                                            In particular for substances that have a high potential to adsorb to soil or that are
                                                            very persistent, the registrant shall consider long-term toxicity testing instead of
                                                            short-term.

9.4.1.   Short-term toxicity to invertebrates

9.4.2.   Effects on soil micro-organisms

9.4.3.   Short-term toxicity to plants
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/359


10.      METHODS OF DETECTION AND ANALYSIS

         Description of the analytical methods shall be provided on request, for the relevant
         compartments for which studies were performed using the analytical method concerned.
         If the analytical methods are not available this shall be justified.
L 396/360       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


                                               ANNEX X

STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBSTANCES MANUFACTURED OR
                  IMPORTED IN QUANTITIES OF 1 000 TONNES OR MORE1

At the level of this Annex, the registrant must submit a proposal and a time schedule for fulfilling
the information requirements of this Annex in accordance with Article 12(1)(e).

Column 1 of this Annex establishes the standard information required for all substances
manufactured or imported in quantities of 1 000 tonnes or more in accordance with Article 12(1)(e).
Accordingly, the information required in column 1 of this Annex is additional to that required in
column 1 of Annexes VII, VIII and IX. Any other relevant physicochemical, toxicological and
ecotoxicological information that is available shall be provided. Column 2 of this Annex lists
specific rules according to which the registrant may propose to omit the required standard
information, replace it by other information, provide it at a later stage or adapt it in another way. If
the conditions are met under which column 2 of this Annex allows an adaptation to be proposed, the
registrant shall clearly state this fact and the reasons for proposing each adaptation under the
appropriate headings in the registration dossier.

In addition to these specific rules, a registrant may propose to adapt the required standard
information set out in column 1 of this Annex according to the general rules contained in Annex XI.
In this case as well, he shall clearly state the reasons for any decision to propose adaptations to the
standard information under the appropriate headings in the registration dossier referring to the
appropriate specific rule(s) in column 2 or in Annex XI2.




1
       This Annex shall apply to producers of articles that are required to register in accordance
       with Article 7 and to other downstream users that are required to carry out tests under this
       Regulation adapted as necessary.
2
       Note: conditions for not requiring a specific test that are set out in the appropriate test
       methods in the Commission Regulation on test methods as specified in Article 13(3) that are
       not repeated in column 2, also apply.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/361


Before new tests are carried out to determine the properties listed in this Annex, all available
in vitro data, in vivo data, historical human data, data from valid (Q)SARs and data from
structurally related substances (read-across approach) shall be assessed first. In vivo testing with
corrosive substances at concentration/dose levels causing corrosivity shall be avoided. Prior to
testing, further guidance on testing strategies should be consulted in addition to this Annex.

When, for certain endpoints, it is proposed not to provide information for other reasons than those
mentioned in column 2 of this Annex or in Annex XI, this fact and the reasons shall also be clearly
stated.
L 396/362        EN                         Official Journal of the European Union                                                           30.12.2006


8.     TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION

                      COLUMN 1                                                              COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                       SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

                                            8.4.     If there is a positive result in any of the in vitro genotoxicity studies in Annexes VII or
                                                     VIII, a second in vivo somatic cell test may be necessary, depending on the quality and
                                                     relevance of all the available data.

                                                     If there is a positive result from an in vivo somatic cell study available, the potential for
                                                     germ cell mutagenicity should be considered on the basis of all available data, including
                                                     toxicokinetic evidence. If no clear conclusions about germ cell mutagenicity can be made,
                                                     additional investigations shall be considered.
30.12.2006    EN                         Official Journal of the European Union                                                        L 396/363


                   COLUMN 1                                                           COLUMN 2

         STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                       SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

                                         8.6.3.   A long-term repeated toxicity study (≥ 12 months) may be proposed by the registrant or
                                                  required by the Agency in accordance with Articles 40 or 41 if the frequency and
                                                  duration of human exposure indicates that a longer term study is appropriate and one of
                                                  the following conditions is met:

                                                  –    serious or severe toxicity effects of particular concern were observed in the 28-day
                                                       or 90-day study for which the available evidence is inadequate for toxicological
                                                       evaluation or risk characterisation; or

                                                  –    effects shown in substances with a clear relationship in molecular structure with the
                                                       substance being studied were not detected in the 28-day or 90-day study; or

                                                  –    the substance may have a dangerous property that cannot be detected in a 90-day
                                                       study.
L 396/364        EN                         Official Journal of the European Union                                                        30.12.2006


                        COLUMN 1                                                         COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                       SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

                                            8.6.4.    Further studies shall be proposed by the registrant or may be required by the Agency in
                                                      accordance with Articles 40 or 41 in case of:

                                                      –     toxicity of particular concern (e.g. serious/severe effects); or

                                                      –     indications of an effect for which the available evidence is inadequate for
                                                            toxicological evaluation and/or risk characterisation. In such cases it may also be
                                                            more appropriate to perform specific toxicological studies that are designed to
                                                            investigate these effects (e.g. immunotoxicity, neurotoxicity); or

                                                      –     particular concern regarding exposure (e.g. use in consumer products leading to
                                                            exposure levels which are close to the dose levels at which toxicity is observed).

8.7.   Reproductive toxicity                8.7.     The studies need not be conducted if:

                                                      –     the substance is known to be a genotoxic carcinogen and appropriate risk
                                                            management measures are implemented; or

                                                      –     the substance is known to be a germ cell mutagen and appropriate risk management
                                                            measures are implemented; or
30.12.2006    EN                         Official Journal of the European Union                                                            L 396/365


                   COLUMN 1                                                            COLUMN 2

         STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                       SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

                                                   –     the substance is of low toxicological activity (no evidence of toxicity seen in any of
                                                         the tests available), it can be proven from toxicokinetic data that no systemic
                                                         absorption occurs via relevant routes of exposure (e.g. plasma/blood concentrations
                                                         below detection limit using a sensitive method and absence of the substance and of
                                                         metabolites of the substance in urine, bile or exhaled air) and there is no or no
                                                         significant human exposure.

                                                  If a substance is known to have an adverse effect on fertility, meeting the criteria for
                                                  classification as Repr Cat 1 or 2: R60, and the available data are adequate to support a
                                                  robust risk assessment, then no further testing for fertility will be necessary. However,
                                                  testing for development toxicity must be considered.

                                                  If a substance is known to cause developmental toxicity, meeting the criteria for
                                                  classification as Repr Cat 1 or 2: R61, and the available data are adequate to support a
                                                  robust risk assessment, then no further testing for developmental toxicity will be
                                                  necessary. However, testing for effects on fertility must be considered.
L 396/366         EN                                                 Official Journal of the European Union                            30.12.2006


                           COLUMN 1                                                                           COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                                SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

8.7.2.   Developmental toxicity study, one species, most
         appropriate route of administration, having regard to the
         likely route of human exposure (OECD 414).

8.7.3.   Two-generation reproductive toxicity study,
         one species, male and female, most appropriate route of
         administration, having regard to the likely route of
         human exposure, unless already provided as part of
         Annex IX requirements
30.12.2006       EN                      Official Journal of the European Union                                                              L 396/367


                         COLUMN 1                                                       COLUMN 2

         STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                         SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

8.9.1. Carcinogenicity study             8.9.1.       A carcinogenicity study may be proposed by the registrant or may be required by the
                                                      Agency in accordance with Articles 40 or 41 if:

                                                  –       the substance has a widespread dispersive use or there is evidence of frequent or
                                                          long-term human exposure; and

                                                  –       the substance is classified as mutagen category 3 or there is evidence from the
                                                          repeated dose study(ies) that the substance is able to induce hyperplasia and/or
                                                          pre-neoplastic lesions.

                                                  If the substances is classified as mutagen category 1 or 2, the default presumption would be
                                                  that a genotoxic mechanism for carcinogenicity is likely. In these cases, a carcinogenicity
                                                  test will normally not be required.
L 396/368          EN                                      Official Journal of the European Union                                                         30.12.2006


9.     ECOTOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION

                        COLUMN 1                                                                       COLUMN 2

            STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                      SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

9.2. Degradation                                           9.2.    Further biotic degradation testing shall be proposed if the chemical safety assessment
                                                                  according to Annex I indicates the need to investigate further the degradation of the
                                                                  substance and its degradation products. The choice of the appropriate test(s) depends on
                                                                  the results of the chemical safety assessment and may include simulation testing in
                                                                  appropriate media (e.g. water, sediment or soil).

9.2.1. Biotic

9.3.   Fate and behaviour in the environment

9.3.4. Further information on the environmental fate and   9.3.4. Further testing shall be proposed by the registrant or may be required by the Agency in
behaviour of the substance and/ore degradation products           accordance with Articles 40 or 41 if the chemical safety assessment according to Annex I
                                                                  indicates the need to investigate further the fate and behaviour of the substance. The choice
                                                                  of the appropriate test(s) depends on the results of the chemical safety assessment.
30.12.2006        EN                                          Official Journal of the European Union                                                          L 396/369


                          COLUMN 1                                                                         COLUMN 2

          STANDARD INFORMATION REQUIRED                                           SPECIFIC RULES FOR ADAPTATION FROM COLUMN 1

9.4.     Effects on terrestrial organisms                     9.4.   Long-term toxicity testing shall be proposed by the registrant if the results of the chemical
                                                                      safety assessment according to Annex I indicates the need to investigate further the effects
                                                                      of the substance and/or degradation products on terrestrial organisms. The choice of the
                                                                      appropriate test(s) depends on the outcome of the chemical safety assessment.

                                                                      These studies do not need to be conducted if direct and indirect exposure of the soil
                                                                      compartment is unlikely.

9.4.4. Long-term toxicity testing on invertebrates, unless
already provided as part of Annex IX requirements.

9.4.6. Long-term toxicity testing on plants, unless already
provided as part of Annex IX requirements.

9.5.1.   Long-term toxicity to sediment organisms             9.5.1. Long-term toxicity testing shall be proposed by the registrant if the results of the chemical
                                                                      safety assessment indicates the need to investigate further the effects of the substance
                                                                      and/or relevant degradation products on sediment organisms. The choice of the appropriate
                                                                      test(s) depends on the results of the chemical safety assessment.

9.6.1.   Long-term or reproductive toxicity to birds          9.6.1. Any need for testing should be carefully considered taking into account the large
                                                                      mammalian dataset that is usually available at this tonnage level.
L 396/370          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                   30.12.2006


10.         METHODS OF DETECTION AND ANALYSIS

            Description of the analytical methods shall be provided on request, for the relevant
            compartments for which studies were performed using the analytical method concerned.
            If the analytical methods are not available this shall be justified.
30.12.2006          EN             Official Journal of the European Union                    L 396/371


                                              ANNEX XI

         GENERAL RULES FOR ADAPTATION OF THE STANDARD TESTING REGIME
                                  SET OUT IN ANNEXES VII TO X

Annexes VII to X set out the information requirements for all substances manufactured or imported
in quantities of:

–         1 tonne or more in accordance with Article 12(1)(a),

–         10 tonnes or more in accordance with Article 12(1)(c),

–         100 tonnes or more in accordance with Article 12(1)(d), and

–         1 000 tonnes or more in accordance with Article 12(1)(e).

In addition to the specific rules set out in Column 2 of Annexes VII to X, a registrant may adapt the
standard testing regime in accordance with the general rules set out in Section 1 of this Annex.
Under dossier evaluation the Agency may assess these adaptations to the standard testing regime.

1.        TESTING DOES NOT APPEAR SCIENTIFICALLY NECESSARY

1.1.      Use of existing data

1.1.1.    Data on physical-chemical properties from experiments not carried out according to GLP
          or the test methods referred to in Article 13(3)
L 396/372          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Data shall be considered to be equivalent to data generated by the corresponding test
            methods referred to in Article 13(3) if the following conditions are met:

            1)    adequacy for the purpose of classification and labelling and/or risk assessment;

            2)    sufficient documentation is provided to assess the adequacy of the study; and

            3)    the data are valid for the endpoint being investigated and the study is performed
                  using an acceptable level of quality assurance.

1.1.2.      Data on human health and environmental properties from experiments not carried out
            according to GLP or the test methods referred to in Article 13(3)

            Data shall be considered to be equivalent to data generated by the corresponding test
            methods referred to in Article 13(3) if the following conditions are met:

            1)    adequacy for the purpose of classification and labelling and/or risk assessment;

            2)    adequate and reliable coverage of the key parameters foreseen to be investigated in
                  the corresponding test methods referred to in Article 13(3);

            3)    exposure duration comparable to or longer than the corresponding test methods
                  referred to in Article 13(3) if exposure duration is a relevant parameter; and

            4)    adequate and reliable documentation of the study is provided.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/373


1.1.3.   Historical human data

         Historical human data, such as epidemiological studies on exposed populations, accidental
         or occupational exposure data and clinical studies, shall be considered.

         The strength of the data for a specific human health effect depends, among other things, on
         the type of analysis and on the parameters covered and on the magnitude and specificity of
         the response and consequently the predictability of the effect. Criteria for assessing the
         adequacy of the data include:

         1)    the proper selection and characterisation of the exposed and control groups;

         2)    adequate characterisation of exposure;

         3)    sufficient length of follow-up for disease occurrence;

         4)    valid method for observing an effect;

         5)    proper consideration of bias and confounding factors; and

         6)    a reasonable statistical reliability to justify the conclusion.

         In all cases adequate and reliable documentation shall be provided.
L 396/374          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


1.2.        Weight of evidence

            There may be sufficient weight of evidence from several independent sources of
            information leading to the assumption/conclusion that a substance has or has not a
            particular dangerous property, while the information from each single source alone is
            regarded insufficient to support this notion.

            There may be sufficient weight of evidence from the use of newly developed test methods,
            not yet included in the test methods referred to in Article 13(3) or from an international test
            method recognised by the Commission or the Agency as being equivalent, leading to the
            conclusion that a substance has or has not a particular dangerous property.

            Where sufficient weight of evidence for the presence or absence of a particular dangerous
            property is available:

            –     further testing on vertebrate animals for that property shall be omitted,

            –     further testing not involving vertebrate animals may be omitted.

            In all cases adequate and reliable documentation shall be provided.

1.3.        Qualitative or Quantitative structure-activity relationship ((Q)SAR)

            Results obtained from valid qualitative or quantitative structure-activity relationship
            models ((Q)SARs) may indicate the presence or absence of a certain dangerous property.
            Results of (Q)SARs may be used instead of testing when the following conditions are met:
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/375


         –    results are derived from a (Q)SAR model whose scientific validity has been
              established,

         –    the substance falls within the applicability domain of the (Q)SAR model,

         –    results are adequate for the purpose of classification and labelling and/or risk
              assessment, and

         –    adequate and reliable documentation of the applied method is provided.

         The Agency in collaboration with the Commission, Member States and interested parties
         shall develop and provide guidance in assessing which (Q)SARs will meet these conditions
         and provide examples.

1.4.     In vitro methods

         Results obtained from suitable in vitro methods may indicate the presence of a certain
         dangerous property or may be important in relation to a mechanistic understanding, which
         may be important for the assessment. In this context, "suitable" means sufficiently well
         developed according to internationally agreed test development criteria (e.g. the European
         Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods (ECVAM)) criteria for the entry of a test
         into the prevalidation process). Depending on the potential risk, immediate confirmation
         requiring testing beyond the information foreseen in Annexes VII or VIII or proposed
         confirmation requiring testing beyond the information foreseen in Annexes IX or X for the
         respective tonnage level may be necessary.
L 396/376          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


            If the results obtained from the use of such in vitro methods do not indicate a certain
            dangerous property, the relevant test shall nevertheless be carried out at the appropriate
            tonnage level to confirm the negative result, unless testing is not required in accordance
            with Annexes VII to X or the other rules in this Annex.

            Such confirmation may be waived, if the following conditions are met:

            1)    results are derived from an in vitro method whose scientific validity has been
                  established by a validation study, according to internationally agreed validation
                  principles;

            2)    results are adequate for the purpose of classification and labelling and/or risk
                  assessment; and

            3)    adequate and reliable documentation of the applied method is provided.

1.5.        Grouping of substances and read-across approach

            Substances whose physicochemical, toxicological and ecotoxicological properties are
            likely to be similar or follow a regular pattern as a result of structural similarity may be
            considered as a group, or "category" of substances. Application of the group concept
            requires that physicochemical properties, human health effects and environmental effects
            or environmental fate may be predicted from data for reference substance(s) within the
            group by interpolation to other substances in the group (read-across approach). This avoids
            the need to test every substance for every endpoint. The Agency, after consulting with
            relevant stakeholders and other interested parties, shall issue guidance on technically and
            scientifically justified methodology for the grouping of substances sufficiently in advance
            of the first registration deadline for phase-in substances.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/377


         The similarities may be based on:

         1)    a common functional group;

         2)    the common precursors and/or the likelihood of common breakdown products via
               physical and biological processes, which result in structurally similar chemicals; or

         3)    a constant pattern in the changing of the potency of the properties across the
               category.

         If the group concept is applied, substances shall be classified and labelled on this basis.

         In all cases results should:

         –     be adequate for the purpose of classification and labelling and/or risk assessment,

         –     have adequate and reliable coverage of the key parameters addressed in the
               corresponding test method referred to in Article 13(3),

         –     cover an exposure duration comparable to or longer than the corresponding test
               method referred to in Article 13(3) if exposure duration is a relevant parameter, and

         –     adequate and reliable documentation of the applied method shall be provided.
L 396/378             EN             Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


2.          TESTING IS TECHNICALLY NOT POSSIBLE

            Testing for a specific endpoint may be omitted, if it is technically not possible to conduct
            the study as a consequence of the properties of the substance: e.g. very volatile, highly
            reactive or unstable substances cannot be used, mixing of the substance with water may
            cause danger of fire or explosion or the radio-labelling of the substance required in certain
            studies may not be possible. The guidance given in the test methods referred to in
            Article 13(3), more specifically on the technical limitations of a specific method, shall
            always be respected.

3.          SUBSTANCE-TAILORED EXPOSURE-DRIVEN TESTING

3.1.        Testing in accordance with sections 8.6 and 8.7 of Annex VIII, Annex IX and Annex X
            may be omitted, based on the exposure scenario(s) developed in the Chemical Safety
            Report.

3.2.        In all cases, adequate justification and documentation shall be provided. The justification
            shall be based on an exposure assessment in accordance with section 5 of Annex I and be
            consistent with the criteria adopted pursuant to section 3.3, and the specific conditions of
            use must be communicated through the chemical supply chain in accordance with
            Articles 31 or 32.

3.3.        The Commission shall adopt the measures designed to amend non-essential elements of
            this Regulation by supplementing it, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article
            133(4), to set the criteria defining what constitutes adequate justification under Section 3.2
            by 1 December 2008.
30.12.2006          EN            Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/379


                                             ANNEX XII

                         GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR DOWNSTREAM USERS
           TO ASSESS SUBSTANCES AND PREPARE CHEMICAL SAFETY REPORTS

Introduction

The purpose of this Annex is to set out how downstream users are to assess and document that the
risks arising from the substance(s) they use are adequately controlled during their use for a use not
covered by the Safety Data Sheet supplied to them and that other users further down the supply
chain can adequately control the risks. The assessment shall cover the life-cycle of the substance,
from its receipt by the downstream user, for his own uses and for his identified uses further down
the supply chain. The assessment shall consider the use of the substance on its own, in a preparation
or in an article.

In carrying out the chemical safety assessment and producing the Chemical Safety Report, the
downstream user shall take account of information received from the supplier of the chemical in
accordance with Article 31 and 32 of this Regulation. Where available and appropriate, an
assessment carried out under Community legislation, (e.g. risk assessments completed under
Regulation (EEC) No 793/93) shall be taken into account in the chemical safety assessment and be
reflected in the Chemical Safety Report. Deviations from such assessments shall be justified.
Assessments carried out under other international and national programmes may also be taken into
account.
L 396/380        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


The process which the downstream user goes through in carrying out the chemical safety
assessment and in producing his Chemical Safety Report, involves three steps:

Step 1: Development of exposure scenario(s)

The downstream user shall develop exposure scenarios for uses not covered in a Safety Data Sheet
supplied to him in accordance with Section 5 of Annex I.

Step 2: If necessary, a refinement of the hazard assessment by the supplier;

If the downstream user considers the hazard and PBT assessments reported in the Safety Data Sheet
supplied to him to be appropriate, then no further hazard assessment or PBT and vPvB assessment
is necessary. In this case he shall use the relevant information reported by the supplier for the risk
characterisation. This shall be stated in the Chemical Safety Report.

If the downstream user considers the assessments reported in the Safety Data Sheet supplied to him
to be inappropriate, then he shall carry out the relevant assessments in accordance with
Sections 1 to 4 of Annex I as appropriate to him.

In those cases where the downstream user considers that information in addition to that provided by
the supplier is necessary for producing his Chemical Safety Report the downstream user shall gather
this information. Where this information can only be obtained by testing on vertebrate animals, he
shall submit a proposal for a testing strategy to the Agency in accordance with Article 38. He shall
explain why he considers that additional information is necessary. While waiting for results of
further testing, he shall record in his chemical safety report the risk management measures intended
to manage the risks being explored that he has put in place.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/381


On completion of any additional testing, the downstream user shall revise the Chemical Safety
Report, and his Safety Data Sheet if he is required to prepare one, as appropriate.

Step 3: Risk characterisation.

A risk characterisation shall be carried out for each new exposure scenario as prescribed in
Section 6 of Annex I. The risk characterisation shall be presented under the relevant heading of the
Chemical Safety Report and summarised in the Safety Data Sheet under the relevant heading(s).

When generating an exposure scenario it will be necessary to make initial assumptions about the
operating conditions and risk managements measures. If the initial assumptions lead to a risk
characterisation indicating inadequate protection of human health and the environment, then it shall
be necessary to carry out an iterative process with amendment of one or a number of factors until
adequate control can be demonstrated. This may require the generation of additional hazard or
exposure information or appropriate alteration of the process, operating conditions or risk
management measures. Therefore, iterations may be made between on the one hand developing and
revising an (initial) exposure scenario, which includes developing and implementing risk
management measures, and on the other hand generating further information to produce the
definitive exposure scenario. The purpose of generating further information is to establish a more
precise risk characterisation, based on a refined hazard assessment and/or exposure assessment.

The downstream user shall produce a Chemical Safety Report detailing his chemical safety
assessment using part B, Sections 9 and 10, of the format set out in Section 7 of Annex I and the
other sections of this format, if appropriate.
L 396/382       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                   30.12.2006


Part A of the Chemical Safety Report shall include a declaration that the risk management measures
outlined in the relevant exposure scenarios are implemented by the downstream user for his own
uses and that the risk management measures outlined in the exposure scenarios for the identified
uses are communicated down the supply chain.
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/383


                                              ANNEX XIII

       CRITERIA FOR THE IDENTIFICATION OF PERSISTENT, BIOACCUMULATIVE AND
       TOXIC SUBSTANCES, AND VERY PERSISTENT AND VERY BIOACCUMULATIVE
                                             SUBSTANCES

This Annex lays down the criteria for the identification of:

(i)       persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic substances (PBT-substances), and

(ii)      very persistent and very bioaccumulative substances (vPvB-substances).

A substance is identified as a PBT substance if it fulfils the criteria in Sections 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3.
A substance is identified as a vPvB substance if it fulfils the criteria in Sections 2.1 and 2.2. This
annex shall not apply to inorganic substances, but shall apply to organo-metals.

1.        PBT-substances

          A substance that fulfils all three of the criteria of the sections below is a PBT substance.

1.1.      Persistence

          A substance fulfils the persistence criterion (P-) when:

          –     the half-life in marine water is higher than 60 days, or

          –     the half-life in fresh- or estuarine water is higher than 40 days, or
L 396/384          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            –     the half-life in marine sediment is higher than 180 days, or

            –     the half-life in fresh- or estuarine water sediment is higher than 120 days, or

            –     the half-life in soil is higher than 120 days.

            The assessment of the persistency in the environment shall be based on available half-life
            data collected under the adequate conditions, which shall be described by the registrant.

1.2.        Bioaccumulation

            A substance fulfils the bioaccumulation criterion (B-) when:

            –     the bioconcentration factor (BCF) is higher than 2 000.

            The assessment of bioaccumulation shall be based on measured data on bioconcentration in
            aquatic species. Data from freshwater as well as marine water species can be used.

1.3.        Toxicity

            A substance fulfils the toxicity criterion (T-) when:

            –     the long-term no-observed effect concentration (Noec) for marine or freshwater
                  organisms is less than 0,01 mg/l, or

            –     the substance is classified as carcinogenic (category 1 or 2), mutagenic (category 1
                  or 2), or toxic for reproduction (category 1, 2, or 3), or
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/385


         –     there is other evidence of chronic toxicity, as identified by the classifications:
               T, R48, or Xn, R48 according to Directive 67/548/EEC.

2.       vPvB – substances

         A substance that fulfils the criteria of the sections below is a vPvB substance.

2.1.     Persistence

         A substance fulfils the very persistence criterion (vP-) when:

         –     the half-life in marine, fresh- or estuarine water is higher than 60 days, or

         –     the half-life in marine, fresh- or estuarine water sediment is higher than 180 days, or

         –     the half-life in soil is higher than 180.

2.2.     Bioaccumulation

         A substance fulfils the very bioaccumulative criterion (vB-) when:

         –     the bioconcentration factor is greater than 5 000.
L 396/386   EN             Official Journal of the European Union   30.12.2006


                                     ANNEX XIV

                 LIST OF SUBSTANCES SUBJECT TO AUTHORISATION
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/387


                                               ANNEX XV

                                                DOSSIERS

I.       INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS

         This Annex lays down general principles for preparing dossiers to propose and justify:

         –     harmonised classification and labelling of CMRs, respiratory sensitisers and other
               effects,

         –     the identification of PBTs, VPVBs, or a substance of equivalent concern,

         –     restrictions of the manufacture, placing on the market or use of a substance within
               the Community.

         The relevant parts of Annex I shall be used for the methodology and format of any dossier
         according to this Annex.

         For all dossiers any relevant information from registration dossiers shall be considered and
         other available information may be used. For hazard information which has not been
         previously submitted to the Agency, a robust study summary shall be included in the
         dossier.
L 396/388           EN               Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


II.         CONTENT OF DOSSIERS

1.          Dossier for harmonised classification and labelling for CMRs, respiratory sensitisers and
            other effects

            Proposal

            The proposal shall include the identity of the substance(s) concerned and the harmonised
            classification and labelling proposed.

            Justification

            A comparison of the available information with the criteria for CMRs, respiratory
            sensitisers and other effects on a case by case basis in Directive 67/548/EEC according to
            the relevant parts of Section 1 of Annex I shall be completed and documented in the format
            set out in Part B of the Chemical Safety Report in Annex I.

            Justification for other effects at Community Level

            Justification shall be provided that there is a need for action demonstrated at Community
            Level
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/389


2.       Dossier for the identification of a substance as a CMR, PBT, vPvB or a substance of
         equivalent concern according to Article 59

         Proposal

         The proposal shall include the identity of substance(s) concerned and whether it is
         proposed to be identified as a CMR according to Article 57(a), (b) or (c), a PBT according
         to Article 57(d), a VPVB according to Article 57(e), or a substance of equivalent concern
         according to Article 57(f).

         Justification

         A comparison of the available information with the criteria in Annex XIII for PBT
         according to Article 57(d), and vPvBs according to Article 57(e), or an assessment of the
         hazards and a comparison with Article 57(f), according to the relevant parts of Section 1 to
         4 of Annex I shall be completed. This shall be documented in the format set out in Part B
         of the Chemical Safety Report in Annex I.

         Information on exposures, alternative substances and risks

         The available use and exposure information and information on alternative substances and
         techniques shall be provided.
L 396/390          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


3.          Dossiers for restrictions proposal

            Proposal

            The proposal shall include the identity of the substance and the restriction(s) proposed for
            the manufacture, placing on the market or use(s) and a summary of the justification.

            Information on hazard and risk

            The risks to be addressed with the restriction shall be described based on an assessment of
            the hazard and risks according to the relevant parts of Annex I and shall be documented in
            the format set out in Part B of that Annex for the Chemical Safety Report.

            Evidence shall be provided that implemented risk management measures (including those
            identified in registrations under Articles 10 to 14) are not sufficient.

            Information on alternatives

            Available information on alternative substances and techniques shall be provided,
            including:

            –     information on the risks to human health and the environment related to the
                  manufacture or use of the alternatives,

            –     availability, including the time scale,

            –     technical and economical feasibility.
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/391


Justification for Restrictions at Community Level

         Justification shall be provided that:

         –     action is required on a Community-wide basis,

         –     a restriction is the most appropriate Community wide measure which shall be
               assessed using the following criteria:

               (i)    effectiveness: the restriction must be targeted to the effects or exposures that
                      cause the risks identified, capable of reducing these risks to an acceptable level
                      within a reasonable period of time and proportional to the risk;

               (ii)   practicality: the restriction must be implementable, enforceable and
                      manageable;

               (iii) monitorability: it must be possible to monitor the result of the implementation
                      of the proposed restriction.

         Socio-economic assessment

         The socio-economic impacts of the proposed restriction may be analysed with reference to
         Annex XVI. To this end, the net benefits to human health and the environment of the
         proposed restriction may be compared to its net costs to manufacturers, importers,
         downstream users, distributors, consumers and society as a whole.

         Information on stakeholder consultation

         Information on any consultation of stakeholders and how their views have been taken into
         account shall be included in the dossier.
L 396/392          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


                                                ANNEX XVI

                                    SOCIO-ECONOMIC ANALYSIS

This Annex outlines the information that may be addressed by those submitting a socio-economic
analysis (SEA) with an application for authorisation, as specified in Article 62(5)(a), or in
connection with a proposed restriction, as specified in Article 69(6)(b).

The Agency shall prepare guidance for the preparation of SEAs. SEAs, or contributions to them,
shall be submitted in the format specified by the Agency in accordance with Article 111.

However, the level of detail and scope of the SEA, or contributions to them, shall be the
responsibility of the applicant for authorisation, or, in the case of a proposed restriction, the
interested party. The information provided can address the socio-economic impacts at any level.

An SEA may include the following elements:

–           Impact of a granted or refused authorisation on the applicant(s), or, in the case of a
            proposed restriction, the impact on industry (e.g. manufacturers and importers). The impact
            on all other actors in the supply chain, downstream users and associated businesses in
            terms of commercial consequences such as impact on investment, research and
            development, innovation, one-off and operating costs (e.g. compliance, transitional
            arrangements, changes to existing processes, reporting and monitoring systems, installation
            of new technology, etc.) taking into account general trends in the market and technology.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/393


–        Impacts of a granted or refused authorisation, or a proposed restriction, on consumers. For
         example, product prices, changes in composition or quality or performance of products,
         availability of products, consumer choice, as well as effects on human health and the
         environment to the extent that these affect consumers.

–        Social implications of a granted or refused authorisation, or a proposed restriction. For
         example job security and employment.

–        Availability, suitability, and technical feasibility of alternative substances and/or
         technologies, and economic consequences thereof, and information on the rates of, and
         potential for, technological change in the sector(s) concerned. In the case of an application
         for authorisation, the social and/or economic impacts of using any available alternatives.

–        Wider implications on trade, competition and economic development (in particular for
         SMEs and in relation to third countries) of a granted or refused authorisation, or a proposed
         restriction. This may include consideration of local, regional, national or international
         aspects.

–        In the case of a proposed restriction, proposals for other regulatory or non-regulatory
         measures that could meet the aim of the proposed restriction (this shall take account of
         existing legislation). This should include an assessment of the effectiveness and the costs
         linked to alternative risk management measures.
L 396/394          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


–           In the case of a proposed restriction or refused authorisation, the benefits for human health
            and the environment as well as the social and economic benefits of the proposed
            restriction. For example, worker health, environmental performance and the distribution of
            these benefits, for example, geographically, population groups.

–           An SEA may also address any other issue that is considered to be relevant by the
            applicant(s) or interested party.
30.12.2006       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                          L 396/395


                                            ANNEX XVII



             RESTRICTIONS ON THE MANUFACTURE, PLACING ON THE MARKET
                      AND USE OF CERTAIN DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES,
                                PREPARATIONS AND ARTICLES



Designation of the substance, of the groups                   Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

1.       Polychlorinated terphenyls (PCTs)       1. Shall not be used. However, the following
                                                 use of equipment, installations and fluids
–        Preparations, including waste oils,     which were in service on 30 June 1986 shall
         with a PCT content higher than          continue to be permitted until they are
         0,005 % by weight.                      disposed of or reach the end of their service
                                                 life:

                                                 (a)     closed-system electrical equipment
                                                         transformers, resistors and inductors;

                                                 (b)     large condensers (≥ 1 kg total weight);

                                                 (c)     small condensers;

                                                 (d)     heat-transmitting fluids in
                                                         closed-circuit heat-transfer
                                                         installations;

                                                 (e)     hydraulic fluids for underground
                                                         mining equipment.
L 396/396      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                               2. The Member State may, for reasons of
                                               protection of human health and the
                                               environment, prohibit the use of equipment,
                                               installations and fluids covered by
                                               paragraph 1 before they are disposed of or
                                               reach the end of their service life.

                                               3. The placing on the second-hand market of
                                               equipment, plant and fluids covered by
                                               paragraph 1 which are not intended for
                                               disposal shall be prohibited.

                                               4. Where the Member State considers that it
                                               is not possible for technical reasons to use
                                               substitute articles, it may permit the use of
                                               PCTs and preparations thereof where the
                                               latter are solely intended, in the normal
                                               conditions of maintenance of equipment, to
                                               supplement the level of liquids containing
                                               PCTs in properly functioning existing
                                               installations purchased before
                                               1 October 1985.

                                               5. The Member State may, provided prior
                                               notification stating the reasons is sent to the
                                               Commission, grant derogations from the ban
                                               on the placing on the market and use of
                                               primary and intermediate substances or
                                               preparations, in so far as they consider that
                                               these derogations have no deleterious effects
                                               on human health and the environment.
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                          L 396/397


 Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
     of substances or of the preparation

                                                6. Without prejudice to the implementation
                                                of other Community provisions relating to
                                                the labelling of dangerous substances and
                                                preparations, equipment and installations
                                                containing PCTs must also display
                                                instructions concerning the disposal of PCTs
                                                and the maintenance and use of equipment
                                                and installations containing them. These
                                                instructions must be capable of being read
                                                horizontally when the object containing the
                                                PCTs is installed in the normal way. The
                                                inscription must stand out clearly from its
                                                background and shall be in a language which
                                                is understood in the territory where it is being
                                                used.

2.       Chloro-1-ethylene (monomer vinyl       Shall not be used as aerosol propellant for
         chloride)                              any use.

         CAS No 75-01-4

         EINECS No 200-831-0

3.       Liquid substances or preparations,     1. Shall not be used in:
         which are regarded as dangerous
         according to the definitions in          –         ornamental objects, intended to
         Council Directive 67/548/EEC and                   produce light or colour effects by
         Directive 1999/45/EC.                              means of different phases, for
                                                            example in ornamental lamps and
                                                            ashtrays,

                                                  –         tricks and jokes,

                                                  –         games for one or more participants,
                                                            or any object intended to be used
                                                            as such, even with ornamental
                                                            aspects.
L 396/398          EN              Official Journal of the European Union                         30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                    Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                                  2. Without prejudice to paragraph 1,
                                                  substances and preparations which:

                                                    –         present an aspiration hazard and
                                                              are labelled with R65, and

                                                    –         can be used as fuel in decorative
                                                              lamps, and

                                                    –         are placed on the market in
                                                              packaging of a capacity of 15 litres
                                                              or less,

                                                  shall not contain a colouring agent, unless
                                                  required for fiscal reasons, or perfume or
                                                  both.

                                                  3. Without prejudice to the implementation
                                                  of other Community provisions relating to
                                                  the classification, packaging and labelling of
                                                  dangerous substances and preparations, the
                                                  packaging of substances and preparations
                                                  covered by paragraph 2, where intended for
                                                  use in lamps, must be marked legibly and
                                                  indelibly as follows:

                                                  "Keep lamps filled with this liquid out of the
                                                  reach of children".

4.          Tris (2,3 dibromopropyl) phosphate    Shall not be used in textile articles, such as
                                                  garments, undergarments and linen, intended
            CAS No 126-72-7                       to come into contact with the skin.
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                          L 396/399


Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

5.       Benzene                               1. Not permitted in toys or parts of toys as
                                               placed on the market where the concentration
         CAS No 71-43-2                        of benzene in the free state is in excess of
                                               5 mg/kg of the weight of the toy or part of
         EINECS No 200-753-785                 toy.

                                               2. Shall not be used in concentrations equal
                                               to, or greater than, 0,1 % by mass in
                                               substances or preparations placed on the
                                               market.

                                               3. However, paragraph 2 shall not apply to:

                                               (a)       motor fuels which are covered by
                                                         Directive 98/70/EC;

                                               (b)       substances and preparations for use
                                                         in industrial processes not allowing
                                                         for the emission of benzene in
                                                         quantities in excess of those laid
                                                         down in existing legislation;

                                               (c)       waste covered by Council
                                                         Directive 91/689/EEC of
                                                         12 December 1991 on hazardous
                                                         waste1 and Directive 2006/12/EC.
L 396/400          EN            Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


 Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
     of substances or of the preparation

6.          Asbestos fibres

(a)         Crocidolite                         1. The placing on the market and use of these
                                                fibres and of articles containing these fibres
            CAS No 12001-28-4                   added intentionally shall be prohibited.

(b)         Amosite

            CAS No 12172-73-5

(c)         Anthophyllite CAS No 77536-67-5

(d)         Actinolite                          However, Member States may except the
                                                placing on the market and use of diaphragms
            CAS No 77536-66-4                   containing chrysotile (point (f)) for existing
                                                electrolysis installations until they reach the
(e)         Tremolite                           end of their service life, or until suitable
                                                asbestos-free substitutes become available,
            CAS No 77536-68-6                   whichever is the sooner. The Commission
                                                will review this derogation before
(f)         Chrysotile2
                                                1 January 2008.
            CAS No 12001-29-5
                                                2. The use of articles containing asbestos
            CAS No 132207-32-0                  fibres referred to in paragraph 1 which were
                                                already installed and/or in service before
                                                1 January 2005 shall continue to be permitted
                                                until they are disposed of or reach the end of
                                                their service life. However, Member States
                                                may, for reasons of protection of human
                                                health, prohibit the use of such articles before
                                                they are disposed of or reach the end of their
                                                service life.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/401


 Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
     of substances or of the preparation

                                                 Member States shall not permit the
                                                 introduction of new applications for
                                                 chrysotile asbestos on their territories.

                                                 3. Without prejudice to the application of
                                                 other Community provisions on the
                                                 classification, packaging and labelling of
                                                 dangerous substances and preparations, the
                                                 placing on the market and use of these fibres
                                                 and of articles containing these fibres, as
                                                 permitted according to the preceding
                                                 derogations, shall be permitted only if the
                                                 articles bear a label in accordance with the
                                                 provisions of Appendix 7 to this Annex.

7.       Tris(aziridinyl)phosphinoxide           Shall not be used in textile articles, such as
                                                 garments, undergarments and linen, intended
         CAS No 5455-55-1                        to come into contact with the skin.

8.       Polybromobiphenyls;
         Polybrominatedbiphenyls (PBB)

         CAS No 59536-65-1

9.       Soap bark powder                        1. Shall not be used in jokes and hoaxes or in
         (Quillaja saponaria) and its            objects intended to be used as such, for
         derivatives containing saponines        instance as a constituent of sneezing powder
                                                 and stink bombs.
         Powder of the roots of
         Helleborus viridis and                  2. However, paragraph 1 does not apply to
         Helleborus niger                        stink bombs containing not more than 1,5 ml
                                                 of liquid.
         Powder of the roots of
         Veratrum album and
         Veratrum nigrum
L 396/402          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                      Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

            Benzidine and/or its derivatives

            CAS No 92-87-5

            EINECS No 202-199-1

            o-Nitrobenzaldehyde

            CAS No 552-89-6

            Wood powder

10.         Ammonium sulphide

            CAS No 12135-76-1

            Ammonium hydrogen sulphide

            CAS No 12124-99-1

            Ammonium polysulphide

            CAS No 9080-17-5

            EINECS No 232-989-1
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/403


Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

11.      Volatile esters of bromoacetic
         acids:

         Methyl bromoacetate

         CAS No 96-32-2

         EINECS No 202-499-2

         Ethyl bromoacetate

         CAS No 105-36-2

         EINECS No 203-290-9

         Propyl bromoacetate

         CAS No 35223-80-4

         Butyl bromoacetate
L 396/404           EN            Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                   Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

12.         2-Naphthylamine                      1. Shall not be used in concentrations equal
                                                 to or greater than 0,1 % by weight in
            CAS No 91-59-8                       substances and preparations placed on the
                                                 market.
            EINECS No 202-080-4
                                                 However, this provision shall not apply to
            and its salts                        waste containing one or more of these
                                                 substances and covered by Directives
13.         Benzidine                            91/689/EEC and 2006/12/EC.
            CAS No 92-87-5                       2. Such substances and preparations shall not
                                                 be sold to the general public.
            EINECS No 202-199-1
                                                 3. Without prejudice to the application of
            and its salts
                                                 other Community provisions on the
14.         4-Nitrobiphenyl                      classification, packaging and labelling of
                                                 dangerous substances and preparations, the
            CAS No 92-93-3                       packaging of such preparations shall be
                                                 legible and indelibly marked as follows:
            EINECS No 202-204-7
                                                 "Restricted to professional users".
15.         4-Aminobiphenyl xenylamine

            CAS No 92-67-1

            EINECS No 202-177-1

            and its salts
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/405


Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

16.      Lead carbons:

         (a)   Neutral anhydrous carbonate      Shall not be used as substances and a
               (PbCO3)                          constituent of preparations intended for use
                                                as paints, except for the restoration and
               CAS No 598-63-0                  maintenance of works of art and historic
                                                buildings and their interiors, where
               EINECS No 209-943-4              Member States wish to permit this on their
                                                territory, in accordance with the provisions of
         (b)   Trilead-bis(carbonate)-          ILO Convention 13 on the use of white lead
               dihydroxide 2 Pb CO3-            and sulphates of lead in paint.
               Pb(OH)2

               CAS No 1319-46-6

               EINECS No 215-290-6

17.      Lead sulphates

         (a)   PbSO4 (1:1)

               CAS No 7446-14-2

               EINECS No 231-198-9

         (b)   Pbx SO4

               CAS No 15739-80-7

               EINECS No 239-831-0
L 396/406         EN            Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

18.         Mercury compounds                  1. Shall not be used as substances and
                                               constituents of preparations intended for use:

                                               (a)       to prevent the fouling by
                                                         micro-organisms, plants or animals
                                                         of:

                                                         –       the hulls of boats,

                                                         –       cages, floats, nets and any
                                                                 other appliances or equipment
                                                                 used for fish or shellfish
                                                                 farming,

                                                         –       any totally or partly
                                                                 submerged appliances or
                                                                 equipment;

                                               (b)       in the preservation of wood;

                                               (c)       in the impregnation of heavy-duty
                                                         industrial textiles and yarn intended
                                                         for their manufacture;

                                               (d)      in the treatment of industrial waters,
                                                        irrespective of their use.
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/407


Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                               2. The placing on the market of batteries and
                                               accumulators, containing more than
                                               0,0005 % of mercury by weight, including in
                                               those cases where these batteries and
                                               accumulators are incorporated into
                                               appliances shall be prohibited. Button cells
                                               and batteries composed of button cells with a
                                               mercury content of no more than 2 % by
                                               weight shall be exempted from this
                                               prohibition.

19.     Arsenic compounds                      1. Shall not be used as substances and
                                               constituents of preparations intended for use:

                                               (a)       to prevent the fouling by
                                                         micro-organisms, plants or animals
                                                         of:

                                                         –       the hulls of boats,

                                                         –       cages, floats, nets and any
                                                                 other appliances or equipment
                                                                 used for fish or shellfish
                                                                 farming,

                                                         –       any totally or partly
                                                                 submerged appliances or
                                                                 equipment;

                                               (b)       in the preservation of wood.
                                                         Furthermore, wood so treated shall
                                                         not be placed on the market;
L 396/408      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                          30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                               (c)       however, by way of derogation:

                                                         (i)    Relating to the substances and
                                                                preparations in the
                                                                preservation of wood: these
                                                                may only be used in industrial
                                                                installations using vacuum or
                                                                pressure to impregnate wood if
                                                                they are solutions of inorganic
                                                                compounds of the copper,
                                                                chromium, arsenic (CCA)
                                                                type C. Wood so treated shall
                                                                not be placed on the market
                                                                before fixation of the
                                                                preservative is completed.

                                                         (ii)   Relating to wood treated with
                                                                CCA solutions in industrial
                                                                installations according to point
                                                                (i): this may be placed on the
                                                                market for professional and
                                                                industrial use provided that the
                                                                structural integrity of the wood
                                                                is required for human or
                                                                livestock safety and skin
                                                                contact by the general public
                                                                during its service life is
                                                                unlikely:

                                                                –        as structural timber in
                                                                         public and agricultural
                                                                         buildings, office
                                                                         buildings, and industrial
                                                                         premises,

                                                                –        in bridges and
                                                                         bridgework,

                                                                –        as constructional timber
                                                                         in freshwater areas and
                                                                         brackish waters e.g.
                                                                         jetties and bridges,
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                             L 396/409


Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                                                –        as noise barriers,

                                                                –        in avalanche control,

                                                                –        in highway safety
                                                                         fencing and barriers,

                                                                –        as debarked round
                                                                         conifer livestock fence
                                                                         posts,

                                                                –        in earth retaining
                                                                         structures,

                                                                –        as electric power
                                                                         transmission and
                                                                         telecommunications
                                                                         poles,

                                                                –        as underground railway
                                                                         sleepers.

                                                                 Without prejudice to the
                                                                 application of other
                                                                 Community provisions on the
                                                                 classification, packaging and
                                                                 labelling of dangerous
                                                                 substances and preparations,
                                                                 all treated wood placed on the
                                                                 market shall be individually
                                                                 labelled "For professional and
                                                                 industrial installation and use
                                                                 only, contains arsenic". In
                                                                 addition, all wood placed on
                                                                 the market in packs shall also
                                                                 bear a label stating "Wear
                                                                 gloves when handling this
                                                                 wood. Wear a dust mask and
                                                                 eye protection when cutting or
                                                                 otherwise crafting this wood.
                                                                 Waste from this wood shall be
                                                                 treated as hazardous by an
                                                                 authorised undertaking".
L 396/410      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                           30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                                         (iii) Treated wood referred to
                                                               under points (i) and (ii) shall
                                                               not be used:

                                                                –        in residential or
                                                                         domestic constructions,
                                                                         whatever the purpose,

                                                                –        in any application where
                                                                         there is a risk of repeated
                                                                         skin contact,

                                                                –        in marine waters,

                                                                –        for agricultural purposes
                                                                         other than for livestock
                                                                         fence posts and
                                                                         structural uses in
                                                                         accordance with point
                                                                         (ii),

                                                                –        in any application where
                                                                         the treated wood may
                                                                         come into contact with
                                                                         intermediate or finished
                                                                         products intended for
                                                                         human and/or animal
                                                                         consumption.

                                               2. Shall not be used as substances and
                                               constituents of preparations intended for use
                                               in the treatment of industrial waters,
                                               irrespective of their use.
30.12.2006      EN              Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/411


Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

20.      Organostannic compounds               1. Shall not be placed on the market for use
                                               as substances and constituents of
                                               preparations when acting as biocides in free
                                               association paint.

                                               2. Shall not be placed on the market or used
                                               as substances and constituents of
                                               preparations which act as biocides to prevent
                                               the fouling by micro-organisms, plants or
                                               animals of:

                                               (a)       all craft irrespective of their length
                                                         intended for use in marine, coastal,
                                                         estuarine and inland waterways and
                                                         lakes;

                                               (b)       cages, floats, nets and any other
                                                         appliances or equipment used for
                                                         fish or shellfish farming;

                                               (c)       any totally or partly submerged
                                                         appliance or equipment.

                                               3. Shall not be used as substances and
                                               constituents of preparations intended for use
                                               in the treatment of industrial waters.

21.      Di-µ-oxo-di-n-                        Shall be prohibited in a concentration equal
         butylstanniohydroxyborane             to or greater than 0,1 % in substances and
         dibutyltin hydrogen borate            constituents of preparations placed on the
         C8H19BO3Sn (DBB)                      market. However, this provision shall not
                                               apply to this substance (DBB) or preparations
         CAS No 75113-37-0                     containing it if these are intended solely for
                                               conversion into finished articles, among
         ELINCS No 401-040-5                   which this substance will no longer feature in
                                               a concentration equal to or greater than
                                               0,1 %.
L 396/412           EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                          30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                         Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

22.         Pentachlorophenol                         1. Shall not be used in a concentration equal
                                                      to or greater than 0,1 % by mass in
            CAS No 87-86-5                            substances or preparations placed on the
                                                      market.
            EINECS No 201-778-6
                                                      2. Transitional provisions:
            and its salts and esters
                                                      By way of derogation until
                                                      31 December 2008 France, Ireland, Portugal,
                                                      Spain and the United Kingdom may chose
                                                      not to apply this provision to substances and
                                                      preparations intended for use in industrial
                                                      installations not permitting the emission
                                                      and/or discharge of pentachlorophenol (PCP)
                                                      in quantities greater than those prescribed by
                                                      existing legislation:

                                                      (a)       in the treatment of wood.

                                                                However, treated wood shall not be
                                                                used:

                                                                –       inside buildings whether for
                                                                        decorative purposes or not,
                                                                        whatever their purpose
                                                                        (residence, employment,
                                                                        leisure),

                                                                –       for the manufacture and
                                                                        re-treatment of:

                                                                        (i)     containers intended for
                                                                                growing purposes;

                                                                        (ii)    packaging that may
                                                                                come into contact with
                                                                                raw materials,
                                                                                intermediate or finished
                                                                                products destined for
                                                                                human and/or animal
                                                                                consumption;

                                                                        (iii) other materials that may
                                                                              contaminate the products
                                                                              mentioned in (i) and (ii);
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                            L 396/413


Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                               (b)       in the impregnation of fibres and
                                                         heavy-duty textiles not intended in
                                                         any case for clothing or for
                                                         decorative furnishings;

                                               (c)       by way of special exception,
                                                         Member States may on a
                                                         case-by-case basis, permit on their
                                                         territory specialised professionals to
                                                         carry out in situ and for buildings of
                                                         cultural, artistic and historical
                                                         interest, or in emergencies, a
                                                         remedial treatment of timber and
                                                         masonry infected by dry rot fungus
                                                         (Serpula lacrymans) and cubic rot
                                                         fungi.

                                               In any case:

                                               (a)       Pentachlorophenol used alone or as
                                                         a component of preparations
                                                         employed within the framework of
                                                         the above exceptions must have a
                                                         total hexachlorodibenzoparadioxin
                                                         (HCDD) content of not more than
                                                         two parts per million (ppm);

                                               (b)       these substances and preparations
                                                         shall not:

                                                         –       be placed on the market except
                                                                 in packages of 20 litres or
                                                                 more;

                                                         –       be sold to the general public.
L 396/414      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                         30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                               3. Without prejudice to the implementation
                                               of other Community provisions concerning
                                               the classification, packaging and labelling of
                                               dangerous substances and preparations, the
                                               packaging of substances and preparations
                                               covered by paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be
                                               marked clearly and indelibly:

                                               "Reserved for industrial and professional
                                               use".

                                               This provision shall not apply to waste
                                               covered by Directives 91/689/EEC and
                                               2006/12/EC.


23.    Cadmium                                 1. Shall not be used to give colour to finished
                                               articles manufactured from the substances
       CAS No 7440-43-9                        and preparations listed below:
                                                                                               3
       EINECS No 231-152-8                     (a)       –       polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
                                                                 [3904 10] [3904 21]
       and its compounds                                         [3904 22]

                                                         –       polyurethane (PUR)
                                                                 [3909 50]

                                                         –       low-density polyethylene
                                                                 (ld PE), with the exception
                                                                 of low-density
                                                                 polyethylene used for the
                                                                 production of coloured
                                                                 masterbatch [3901 10]

                                                         –       cellulose acetate (CA)
                                                                 [3912 11] [3912 12]

                                                         –       cellulose acetate butyrate
                                                                 (CAB) [3912 11]
                                                                 [3912 12]

                                                         –       epoxy resins [3907 30]

                                                         –       melamine – formaldehyde
                                                                 (MF) resins [3909 20]
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/415


Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                                         –       urea – formaldehyde (UF)
                                                                 resins [3909 10]

                                                         –       unsaturated polyesters
                                                                 (UP) [3907 91]
                                                                                               3
                                                         –       polyethylene terephthalate
                                                                 (PET) [3907 60]

                                                         –       polybutylene terephthalate
                                                                 (PBT)

                                                         –       transparent/general-
                                                                 purpose polystyrene
                                                                 [3903 11] [3903 19]

                                                         –       acrylonitrile
                                                                 methylmethacrylate
                                                                 (AMMA)

                                                         –       cross-linked polyethylene
                                                                 (VPE)

                                                         –       high-impact polystyrene

                                                         –       polypropylene (PP)
                                                                 [3902 10]

                                               (b)       paints [3208] [3209]

                                                         However, if the paints have a high
                                                         zinc content, their residual
                                                         concentration of cadmium shall be
                                                         as low as possible and shall at all
                                                         events not exceed 0,1 % by mass.

                                               In any case, whatever their use or intended
                                               final purpose, finished articles or components
                                               of articles manufactured from the substances
                                               and preparations listed above coloured with
                                               cadmium shall not be placed on the market if
                                               their cadmium content (expressed as
                                               Cd metal) exceeds 0,01 % by mass of the
                                               plastic material.
L 396/416      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                               2. However, paragraph 1 does not apply
                                               to articles to be coloured for safety
                                               reasons.

                                               3. Shall not be used to stabilise the
                                               finished articles listed below
                                               manufactured from polymers or
                                               copolymers of vinyl chloride:
                                                                                              3
                                                 –         packaging materials (bags,
                                                           containers, bottles, lids)
                                                           [3923 29 10] [3920 41]
                                                           [3920 42]

                                                 –         office or school supplies
                                                           [3926 10]

                                                 –         fittings for furniture,
                                                           coachwork or the like
                                                           [3926 30]

                                                 –         articles of apparel and clothing
                                                           accessories (including gloves)
                                                           [3926 20]

                                                 –         floor and wall coverings
                                                           [3918 10]

                                                 –         impregnated, coated, covered
                                                           or laminated textile fabrics
                                                           [5903 10]

                                                 –         imitation leather [4202]

                                                 –         gramophone records [8524 10]

                                                 –         tubes and pipes and their
                                                           fittings [3917 23]

                                                 –         swing doors

                                                 –         vehicles for road transport
                                                           (interior, exterior, underbody)

                                                 –         coating of steel sheet used in
                                                           construction or in industry

                                                 –         insulation for electrical wiring
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/417


Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                               In any case, whatever their use or intended
                                               final purpose, the placing on the market of
                                               the above finished articles or components of
                                               articles manufactured from polymers or
                                               copolymers of vinyl chloride, stabilised by
                                               substances containing cadmium shall be
                                               prohibited, if their cadmium content
                                               (expressed as Cd metal) exceeds 0,01 % by
                                               mass of the polymer.

                                               4. However, paragraph 3 does not apply to
                                               finished articles using cadmium-based
                                               stabilisers for safety reasons.

                                               5. Within the meaning of this Regulation,
                                               "cadmium plating" means any deposit or
                                               coating of metallic cadmium on a metallic
                                               surface.

                                               Shall not be used for cadmium plating
                                               metallic articles or components of the articles
                                               used in the sectors/applications listed below:

                                               (a)       equipment and machinery for:
                                                                                             3
                                                         –       food production [8210]
                                                                 [8417 20] [8419 81]
                                                                 [8421 11] [8421 22]
                                                                 [8422] [8435] [8437]
                                                                 [8438] [8476 11]

                                                         –       agriculture [8419 31]
                                                                 [8424 81] [8432] [8433]
                                                                 [8434] [8436]

                                                         –       cooling and freezing
                                                                 [8418]

                                                         –       printing and book-binding
                                                                 [8440] [8442] [8443]
L 396/418      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                               (b)       equipment and machinery for the
                                                         production of:
                                                                                             3
                                                         –       household goods [7321]
                                                                 [8421 12] [8450] [8509]
                                                                 [8516]

                                                         –       furniture [8465] [8466]
                                                                 [9401] [9402] [9403]
                                                                 [9404]

                                                         –       sanitary ware [7324]

                                                         –       central heating and air
                                                                 conditioning plant [7322]
                                                                 [8403] [8404] [8415]

                                               In any case, whatever their use or intended
                                               final purpose, the placing on the market of
                                               cadmium-plated articles or components of
                                               such articles used in the sectors/applications
                                               listed in points (a) and (b) above and of
                                               articles manufactured in the sectors listed in
                                               point (b) above shall be prohibited.

                                               6. The provisions referred to in paragraph 5
                                               are also applicable to cadmium-plated articles
                                               or components of such articles when used in
                                               the sectors/applications listed in points (a)
                                               and (b) below and to articles manufactured in
                                               the sectors listed in (b) below:

                                               (a)       equipment and machinery for the
                                                         production of:
                                                                                             3
                                                         –       paper and board [8419 32]
                                                                 [8439] [8441]

                                                         –       textiles and clothing
                                                                 [8444] [8445] [8447]
                                                                 [8448] [8449] [8451]
                                                                 [8452]
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                          L 396/419


Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                               (b)       equipment and machinery for the
                                                         production of:
                                                                                                3
                                                         –       industrial handling
                                                                 equipment and machinery
                                                                 [8425] [8426] [8427]
                                                                 [8428] [8429] [8430]
                                                                 [8431]

                                                         –       road and agricultural
                                                                 vehicles [chapter 87]

                                                         –       rolling stock [chapter 86]

                                                         –       vessels [chapter 89]

                                               7. However, the restrictions in paragraphs 5
                                               and 6 do not apply to:

                                                 –           articles and components of the
                                                             articles used in the aeronautical,
                                                             aerospace, mining, offshore and
                                                             nuclear sectors whose applications
                                                             require high safety standards and in
                                                             safety devices in road and
                                                             agricultural vehicles, rolling stock
                                                             and vessels,

                                                 –           electrical contacts in any sector of
                                                             use, on account of the reliability
                                                             required of the apparatus on which
                                                             they are installed.
L 396/420      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                               Owing to the development of knowledge and
                                               techniques in respect of substitutes less
                                               dangerous than cadmium and its compounds,
                                               the Commission shall, in consultation with
                                               the Member States, assess the situation at
                                               regular intervals in accordance with the
                                               procedure laid down in Article 133(3) of this
                                               Regulation.
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/421


Designation of the substance, of the groups                   Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

24.      Monomethyl – tetrachlorodiphenyl        1. The placing on the market and use of this
         methane                                 substance and of preparations and articles
                                                 containing it shall be prohibited.
         Trade name: Ugilec 141
                                                 2. By way of exception paragraph 1 shall not
         CAS No 76253-60-6                       apply:

                                                 (a)       in the case of plant and machinery
                                                           already in service on 18 June 1994
                                                           until such plant and machinery is
                                                           disposed of.

                                                           However, Member States may, on
                                                           grounds of human health protection
                                                           and environmental protection,
                                                           prohibit within their territory the use
                                                           of such plant or machinery before it
                                                           is disposed of;

                                                 (b)       in the case of the maintenance of
                                                           plant and machinery already in
                                                           service within a Member State on
                                                           18 June 1994.

                                                 3. The placing on the second-hand market of
                                                 this substance, preparations containing this
                                                 substance and plant/machinery containing
                                                 this substance, shall be prohibited.

25.      Monomethyl-dichloro-diphenyl            The placing on the market and use of this
         methane                                 substance and of preparations and articles
                                                 containing it shall be prohibited.
         Trade name: Ugilec 121, Ugilec 21;
         CAS No – unknown
L 396/422            EN            Official Journal of the European Union                            30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                     Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

26.         Monomethyl-dibromo-diphenyl      The placing on the market and use of this
            methane                          substance and of preparations and articles
            bromobenzylbromotoluene, mixture containing it shall be prohibited.
            of isomers

            Trade name: DBBT

            CAS No 99688-47-8

27.         Nickel                                1. Shall not be used:

            CAS No 7440-02-0                      (a)       in all post assemblies which are
                                                            inserted into pierced ears and other
            EINECS No 231-111-4                             pierced parts of the human body
                                                            unless the rate of nickel release from
            and its compounds                               such post assemblies is less than
                                                            0,2 µg/cm2/week (migration limit).

                                                  (b)       in articles intended to come into
                                                            direct and prolonged contact with
                                                            the skin such as:

                                                            –       earrings,

                                                            –       necklaces, bracelets and
                                                                    chains, anklets, finger rings,

                                                            –       wrist-watch cases, watch
                                                                    straps and tighteners,

                                                            –       rivet buttons, tighteners, rivets,
                                                                    zippers and metal marks, when
                                                                    these are used in garments,

                                                            –       if the rate of nickel release
                                                                    from the parts of these articles
                                                                    coming into direct and
                                                                    prolonged contact with the
                                                                    skin is greater than
                                                                    0,5 µg/cm2/week;
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/423


Designation of the substance, of the groups                   Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                                 (c)       in articles such as those listed in
                                                           point (b) where these have a
                                                           non-nickel coating unless such
                                                           coating is sufficient to ensure that
                                                           the rate of nickel release from those
                                                           parts of such articles coming into
                                                           direct and prolonged contact with
                                                           the skin will not exceed
                                                           0,5 µg/cm2/week for a period of at
                                                           least two years of normal use of the
                                                           article.

                                                 2. Articles which are the subject of
                                                 paragraph 1, shall not be placed on the
                                                 market unless they conform to the
                                                 requirements set out in those points.

                                                 3. The standards adopted by the European
                                                 Committee for Standardisation (CEN) shall
                                                 be used as the test methods for demonstrating
                                                 the conformity of articles to paragraphs 1 and
                                                 2.

28.      Substances which appear in Annex        Without prejudice to the other parts of this
         I to Directive 67/548/EEC               Annex the following shall apply to entries 28
         classified as carcinogen category 1     to 30:
         or carcinogen category 2 and
         labelled at least as "Toxic (T)" with   1. Shall not be used in substances and
         risk phrase R 45: "May cause            preparations placed on the market for sale to
         cancer" or risk phrase R49:             the general public in individual concentration
         "May cause cancer by inhalation",       equal to or greater than:
         and listed as follows:
                                                   –         either the relevant concentration
         Carcinogen category 1 listed in                     specified in Annex I to
         Appendix 1.                                         Directive 67/548/EEC, or
L 396/424          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                          30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                       Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

            Carcinogen category 2 listed in           –           the relevant concentration specified
            Appendix 2.                                           in Directive 1999/45/EC.

29.         Substances which appear in Annex        Without prejudice to the implementation of
            I to Directive 67/548/EEC               other Community provisions relating to the
            classified as mutagen category 1 or     classification, packaging and labelling of
            mutagen category 2 and labelled         dangerous substances and preparations, the
            with risk phrase R46: "May cause        packaging of such substances and
            heritable genetic damage", and          preparations must be marked legibly and
            listed as follows:                      indelibly as follows:

            Mutagen category 1 listed in            "Restricted to professional users".
            Appendix 3.

            Mutagen category 2 listed in
            Appendix 4.



30.         Substances which appear in Annex        2. By way of derogation, paragraph 1 shall
            I to Directive 67/548/EEC               not apply to:
            classified as toxic to reproduction
            category 1 or toxic to reproduction     (a)       medicinal or veterinary products as
            category 2 and labelled with risk                 defined by Directive 2001/82/EC and
            phrase R60: "May impair fertility"                Directive 2001/83/EC;
            and/or R61: "May cause harm to
            the unborn child", and listed as        (b)       cosmetic products as defined by
            follows:                                          Council Directive 76/768/EEC;

            Toxic to reproduction category 1        (c)       –       motor fuels which are covered
            listed in Appendix 5.                                     by Directive 98/70/EC,

            Toxic to reproduction category 2                  –       mineral oil products intended
            listed in Appendix 6.                                     for use as fuel in mobile or
                                                                      fixed combustion plants,

                                                              –       fuels sold in closed systems
                                                                      (e.g. liquid gas bottles);

                                                    (d)       artists' paints covered by
                                                              Directive 1999/45/EC.
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/425


Designation of the substance, of the groups                     Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

31.      (a)   creosote; wash oil                  1. Shall not be used as substances or in
                                                   preparations in the treatment of wood.
               CAS No 8001-58-9                    Furthermore, wood so treated shall not be
                                                   placed on the market.
               EINECS No 232-287-5
                                                   2. However by way of derogation:

                                                   (a)       Relating to the substances and
         (b)   creosote oil; wash oil                        preparations: these may be used for
                                                             wood treatment in industrial
               CAS No 61789-28-4                             installations or by professionals
                                                             covered by Community legislation
               EINECS No 263-047-8
                                                             on the protection of workers for
                                                             in situ retreatment only if they
                                                             contain:
         (c)   distillates (coal tar),
               naphthalene oils; naphthalene                 (i)    benzo[a]pyrene at a
               oil                                                  concentration of less than
                                                                    0,005 % by mass
               CAS No 84650-04-4
                                                             (ii)   and water extractable phenols
               EINECS No 283-484-8                                  at a concentration of less than
                                                                    3 % by mass.

                                                             Such substances and preparations for
                                                             use in wood treatment in industrial
                                                             installations or by professionals:
L 396/426          EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                         Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

            (d)   creosote oil, acenaphthene                    –       may be placed on the market
                  fraction; wash oil                                    only in packaging of a capacity
                                                                        equal to or greater than 20
                  CAS No 90640-84-9                                     litres,

                  EINECS No 292-605-3                           –       shall not be sold to consumers.

                                                                Without prejudice to the application
                                                                of other Community provisions on
            (e)   distillates (coal tar), upper;                the classification, packaging and
                  heavy anthracene oil                          labelling of dangerous substances
                                                                and preparations, the packaging of
                  CAS No 65996-91-0                             such substances and preparations
                                                                shall be legibly and indelibly marked
                  EINECS No 266-026-1
                                                                as follows:

            (f)   anthracene oil                                "For use in industrial installations or
                                                                professional treatment only".
                  CAS No 90640-80-5
                                                      (b)       Relating to wood treated in industrial
                  EINECS No 292-602-7                           installations or by professionals
                                                                according to point (a) which is
                                                                placed on the market for the first
                                                                time or retreated in-situ: this is
            (g)   tar acids, coal, crude; crude                 permitted for professional and
                  phenols                                       industrial use only, e.g. on railways,
                                                                in electric power transmission and
                  CAS No 65996-85-2
                                                                telecommunications, for fencing, for
                  EINECS No 266-019-3                           agricultural purposes (e.g. stakes for
                                                                tree support) and in harbours and
                                                                waterways.

            (h)   creosote, wood                      (c)       The prohibition in paragraph 1 on the
                                                                placing on the market shall not apply
                  CAS No 8021-39-4                              to wood which has been treated with
                                                                substances listed in entry 31(a) to (i)
                  EINECS No 232-419-1                           before 31 December 2002 and is
                                                                placed on the second-hand market
                                                                for re-use.
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                              L 396/427


Designation of the substance, of the groups                    Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

         (i)   low temperature tar oil,         3. However, treated wood referred to under
               alkaline; extract residues       paragraph 2(b) and (c) shall not be used:
               (coal), low temperature coal
               tar alkaline                       –            inside buildings, whatever their
                                                               purpose,
               CAS No 122384-78-5
                                                  –            in toys,
               EINECS No 310-191-5
                                                  –            in playgrounds,

                                                  –            in parks, gardens, and outdoor
                                                               recreational and leisure facilities
                                                               where there is a risk of frequent
                                                               skin contact,

                                                  –            in the manufacture of garden
                                                               furniture such as picnic tables,

                                                  –            for the manufacture and use and
                                                               any re-treatment of:

                                                          –        containers intended for
                                                                   growing purposes,

                                                          –        packaging that may come into
                                                                   contact with raw materials,
                                                                   intermediate or finished
                                                                   products destined for human
                                                                   and/or animal consumption,

                                                           –       other materials which may
                                                                   contaminate the articles
                                                                   mentioned above.
L 396/428          EN               Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                     Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

32.         Chloroform                             1. Shall not be used in concentrations equal to
                                                   or greater than 0,1 % by weight in substances
            CAS No 67-66-3                         and preparations placed on the market for sale
                                                   to the general public and/or in diffusive
            EINECS No 200-663-8                    applications such as in surface cleaning and
                                                   cleaning of fabrics.
33.         Carbon tetrachloride-
            tetrachloromethane                     2. Without prejudice to the application of
                                                   other Community provisions on the
            CAS No 56-23-5                         classification, packaging and labelling of
                                                   dangerous substances and preparations, the
            EINECS No 200-262-8
                                                   packaging of such substances and
34.         1,1,2 Trichloroethane                  preparations containing them in
                                                   concentrations equal to or greater than 0,1 %
                                                   shall be legible and indelibly marked as
                                                   follows:

            CAS No 79-00-5                         "For use in industrial installations only".

            EINECS No 201-166-9                    By way of derogation this provision shall not
                                                   apply to:
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/429


Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

35.      1,1,2,2 Tetrachloroethane              (a)       medicinal or veterinary products as
                                                          defined by Directive 2001/82/EC and
         CAS No 79-34-5                                   Directive 2001/83/EC;

         EINECS No 201-197-8                    (b)       cosmetic products as defined by
                                                          Directive 76/768/EEC.
36.      1,1,1,2 Tetrachloroethane

         CAS No 630-20-6

37.      Pentachloroethane

         CAS No 76-01-7

         EINECS No 200-925-1

38.      1,1 Dichloroethylene

         CAS No 75-35-4

         EINECS No 200-864-0

39.      1,1,1 Trichloroethane, methyl
         chloroform

         CAS No 71-55-6

         EINECS No 200-756-3
L 396/430          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                      Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

40.         Substances meeting the criteria of      1. Shall not be used on their own or in the
            flammability in                         form of preparations in aerosol generators that
            Directive 67/548/EEC and                are placed on the market for the general
            classified as flammable, highly         public for entertainment and decorative
            flammable or extremely flammable        purposes such as the following:
            regardless of whether they appear
            in Annex I to that Directive or not.      –         metallic glitter intended mainly for
                                                                decoration,

                                                      –         artificial snow and frost,

                                                      –         "whoopee" cushions,
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/431


Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

                                                 –         silly string aerosols,

                                                 –         imitation excrement,

                                                 –         horn for parties,

                                                 –         decorative flakes and foams,

                                                 –         artificial cobwebs,

                                                 –         stink bombs,

                                                 –         etc.

                                               2. Without prejudice to the application of
                                               other Community provisions on the
                                               classification, packaging and labelling of
                                               dangerous substances, the following words
                                               must appear legibly and indelibly on the
                                               packaging of aerosol generators referred to
                                               above:

                                               "For professional users only".

                                               3. By way of derogation, paragraphs 1 and 2
                                               shall not apply to the aerosol generators
                                               referred to in Article 9a of Council
                                               Directive 75/324/EEC of 20 May 1975 on the
                                               approximation of the laws of the Member
                                               States relating to aerosol dispensers4.

                                               4. The articles referred to in paragraphs 1 and
                                               2 shall not be placed on the market unless
                                               they conform to the requirements indicated.

41.      Hexachloroethane                      Shall not be used in the manufacturing or
                                               processing of non-ferrous metals.
         CAS No 67-72-1

         EINECS No 200-6664
L 396/432          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                      Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

42.         Alkanes, C10-C13, chloro                Shall not be placed on the market for use as
            (short-chain chlorinated paraffins)     substances or as constituents of other
            (SCCPs)                                 substances or preparations in concentrations
                                                    higher than 1 %:
            EINECS No 287-476-5
                                                      –         in metalworking;

                                                      –         for fat liquoring of leather.


43.         Azocolourants                           1. Azodyes which, by reductive cleavage of
                                                    one or more azo groups, may release one or
                                                    more of the aromatic amines listed in
                                                    Appendix 8, in detectable concentrations,
                                                    i.e. above 30 ppm in the finished articles or in
                                                    the dyed parts thereof, according to the testing
                                                    methods listed in Appendix 10, shall not be
                                                    used in textile and leather articles which may
                                                    come into direct and prolonged contact with
                                                    the human skin or oral cavity, such as:
                                                      –         clothing, bedding, towels,
                                                                hairpieces, wigs, hats, nappies and
                                                                other sanitary items, sleeping bags,

                                                      –         footwear, gloves, wristwatch straps,
                                                                handbags, purses/wallets,
                                                                briefcases, chair covers, purses
                                                                worn round the neck,

                                                      –         textile or leather toys and toys
                                                                which include textile or leather
                                                                garments,

                                                      –         yarn and fabrics intended for use by
                                                                the final consumer.
                                                    2. Furthermore, the textile and leather articles
                                                    referred to in paragraph 1 above shall not be
                                                    placed on the market unless they conform to
                                                    the requirements set out in that paragraph.
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/433


Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation



                                               3. Azodyes, which are contained in
                                               Appendix 9, "List of azodyes", shall not be
                                               placed on the market or used for colouring
                                               textile and leather articles as a substance or
                                               constituent of preparations in concentrations
                                               higher than 0,1 % by mass.

                                               4. The Commission shall, in the light of new
                                               scientific knowledge, review the provisions
                                               on azocolourants.

44.      Diphenylether, pentabromo             1. Shall not be placed on the market or used
         derivative C12H5Br5O                  as a substance or as a constituent of
                                               preparations in concentrations higher than
                                               0,1 % by mass.

                                               2. Articles may not be placed on the market if
                                               they, or flame-retarded parts thereof, contain
                                               this substance in concentrations higher than
                                               0,1 % by mass.

45.      Diphenylether, octabromo              1. Shall not be placed on the market or used
         derivative C12H2Br8O                  as a substance or as a constituent of
                                               substances or of preparations in
                                               concentrations higher than 0,1 % by mass.

                                               2. Articles may not be placed on the market if
                                               they, or flame-retardant parts thereof, contain
                                               this substance in concentrations higher than
                                               0,1 % by mass.
L 396/434          EN              Official Journal of the European Union                           30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                      Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation

46.         (a)   Nonylphenol                     Shall not be placed on the market or used as a
                  C6H4(OH)C9H19                   substance or constituent of preparations in
                                                  concentrations equal or higher than 0,1 % by
            (b)   Nonylphenol ethoxylate          mass for the following purposes:
                  (C2H4O)nC15H24O                 (1)       industrial and institutional cleaning
                                                            except:
                                                  – controlled closed dry cleaning systems
                                                        where the washing liquid is recycled or
                                                        incinerated,

                                                  – cleaning systems with special treatment
                                                        where the washing liquid is recycled or
                                                        incinerated;

                                                  (2)       domestic cleaning;
                                                  (3)       textiles and leather processing except:
                                                  – processing with no release into waste
                                                        water,

                                                  systems with special treatment where the
                                                  process water is pre-treated to remove the
                                                  organic fraction completely prior to biological
                                                  waste water treatment (degreasing of
                                                  sheepskin);
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                           L 396/435


Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation
                                               (4)       emulsifier in agricultural teat dips;
                                               (5)       metal working except:
                                               – uses in controlled closed systems where
                                                     the washing liquid is recycled or
                                                     incinerated;

                                               (6)       manufacturing of pulp and paper;
                                               (7)       cosmetic products;
                                               (8)       other personal care products except:
                                               – spermicides.

                                               (9)    co-formulants in pesticides and
                                               biocides.
L 396/436      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation
47. Cement                                      1. Cement and cement-containing
                                                preparations shall not be used or placed on
                                                the market, if they contain, when hydrated,
                                                more than 0,0002 % soluble chromium VI of
                                                the total dry weight of the cement.
                                                2. If reducing agents are used, then without
                                                prejudice to the application of other
                                                Community provisions on the classification,
                                                packaging and labelling of dangerous
                                                substances and preparations, the packaging of
                                                cement or cement-containing preparations
                                                shall be legibly and indelibly marked with
                                                information on the packing date, as well as on
                                                the storage conditions and the storage period
                                                appropriate to maintaining the activity of the
                                                reducing agent and to keeping the content of
                                                soluble chromium VI below the limit
                                                indicated in paragraph 1.
                                                3. By way of derogation, paragraphs 1 and 2
                                                shall not apply to the placing on the market
                                                for, and use in, controlled closed and totally
                                                automated processes in which cement and
                                                cement-containing preparations are handled
                                                solely by machines and in which there is no
                                                possibility of contact with the skin.
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/437


Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation
48. Toluene CAS No 108-88-3                    Shall not be placed on the market or used as a
                                               substance or constituent of preparations in a
                                               concentration equal to or higher than 0,1 %
                                               by mass in adhesives and spray paints
                                               intended for sale to the general public.
                                               Member States shall apply these measures
                                               from 15 June 2007.
L 396/438      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                       30.12.2006


Designation of the substance, of the groups                 Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation
49. Trichlorobenzene                           Shall not be placed on the market or used as a
                                               substance or constituent of preparations in a
CAS No 120-82-1
                                               concentration equal to or higher than 0,1 %
                                               by mass for all uses except:
                                               — as an intermediate of synthesis, or
                                               — as a process solvent in closed chemical
                                               applications for chlorination reactions, or
                                               — in the manufacture of 1,3,5 — trinitro —
                                               2,4,6 — triaminobenzene (TATB).
                                               Member States shall apply these measures
                                               from 15 June 2007.
30.12.2006     EN                Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/439


Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
    of substances or of the preparation
50. Polycyclic-aromatic hydrocarbons            1. Extender oils shall not be placed on the
(PAH)                                           market and used for the production of tyres or
                                                parts of tyres, if they contain:
1. Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP)
                                                — more than 1 mg/kg BaP, or
CAS No 50-32-8
                                                — more than 10 mg/kg of the sum of all listed
2. Benzo(e)pyrene (BeP)
                                                PAHs.
CAS No 192-97-2
                                                These limits are regarded as kept, if the
3. Benzo(a)anthracene (BaA)                     polycyclic aromatics (PCA) extract is less
CAS No 56-55-3                                  than 3 % by mass, as measured by the
                                                Institute of Petroleum standard IP346: 1998
4. Chrysen (CHR)                                (Determination of PCA in unused lubricating
CAS No 218-01-9                                 base oils and asphaltene free petroleum
                                                fractions — Dimethyl sulphoxide extraction
5. Benzo(b)fluoranthene (BbFA)                  refractive index method), provided that
CAS No 205-99-2                                 compliance with the limit values of BaP and
                                                of the listed PAHs, as well as the correlation
6. Benzo(j)fluoranthene (BjFA)
                                                of the measured values with the PCA extract,
CAS No 205-82-3                                 is controlled by the manufacturer or importer
7. Benzo(k)fluoranthene (BkFA)                  every six months or after each major
                                                operational change, whichever is earlier.
CAS No 207-08-9
                                                2. Furthermore, the tyres and treads for
8. Dibenzo(a, h)anthracene (DBAhA)              retreading manufactured after 1 January 2010
CAS No 53-70-3                                  may not be placed on the market if they
                                                contain extender oils exceeding the limits
                                                indicated in paragraph 1.
                                                These limits are regarded as kept, if the
                                                vulcanised rubber compounds do not exceed
                                                the limit of 0,35 % Bay protons as measured
                                                and calculated by ISO 21461 (Rubber
                                                vulcanised — Determination of aromaticity of
                                                oil in vulcanised rubber compounds).
                                                3. By way of derogation, paragraph 2 shall
                                                not apply to retreaded tyres if their tread does
                                                not contain extender oils exceeding the limits
                                                referred to in paragraph 1.
                                                4. Member States shall apply these measures
                                                from 1 January 2010.
L 396/440          EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


    Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
        of substances or of the preparation
51. The following phthalates (or other              Shall not be used as substances or as
CAS- and EINECS numbers covering the                constituents of preparations, at concentrations
substance):                                         higher than 0,1 % by mass of the plasticised
                                                    material, in toys and childcare articles1.
bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP)
                                                    Toys and childcare articles containing these
CAS No 117-81-7 Einecs No 204-211-0
                                                    phthalates in a concentration higher than
dibutyl phthalate (DBP)                             0,1 % by mass of the plasticised material shall
CAS No 84-74-2 Einecs No 201-557-4                  not be placed on the market.

benzyl butyl phthalate (BBP)                        The Commission shall re-evaluate, by
                                                    16 January 2010, the measures provided for in
CAS No 85-68-7 Einecs No 201-622-7                  relation to this point in the light of new
                                                    scientific information on such substances and
                                                    their substitutes, and if justified, these
                                                    measures shall be modified accordingly.




1
          For the purposes of this point "childcare article" shall mean any product intended to
          facilitate sleep, relaxation, hygiene, the feeding of children or sucking on the part of
          children.
30.12.2006         EN                Official Journal of the European Union                          L 396/441


    Designation of the substance, of the groups                  Conditions of restriction
        of substances or of the preparation
52. The following phthalates (or other              Shall not be used as substances or as
CAS- and EINECS numbers covering the                constituents of preparations, at concentrations
substance):                                         higher than 0,1 % by mass of the plasticised
                                                    material, in toys and childcare articles1 which
di-"isononyl" phthalate (DINP)
                                                    can be placed in the mouth by children.
CAS No 28553-12-0 and 68515-48-0 Einecs
                                                    Toys and childcare articles containing these
No 249-079-5 and 271-090-9
                                                    phthalates in a concentration higher than
di-"isodecyl" phthalate (DIDP)                      0,1 % by mass of the plasticised material shall
CAS No 26761-40-0 and 68515-49-1 Einecs             not be placed on the market.
No 247-977-1 and 271-091-4                          The Commission shall re-evaluate, by
di-n-octyl phthalate (DNOP)                         16 January 2010, the measures provided for in
CAS No 117-84-0 Einecs No 204-214-7                 relation to this point in the light of new
                                                    scientific information on such substances and
                                                    their substitutes, and if justified, these
                                                    measures shall be modified accordingly.




1
        OJ L 377, 31.12.1991, p. 20. Directive as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 of
        the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 33, 4.2.2006, p. 1).
2
        Chrysotile has two CAS Nos, confirmed by ECB.
3
        Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 of 23 July 1987 on the tariff and statistical
        nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, 7.9.1987). Regulation as last
        amended by Regulation (EC) No 426/2006 (OJ L 79, 16.3.2006, p. 1).
4
        OJ L 147, 9.6.1975, p. 40. Directive as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 807/2003
        (OJ L 122, 16.5.2003, p. 36).




1
          For the purposes of this point "childcare article" shall mean any product intended to
          facilitate sleep, relaxation, hygiene, the feeding of children or sucking on the part of
          children.
L 396/442          EN               Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


                                            Appendices 1 to 6

FOREWORD

Explanations of column headings

            Substances:

            The name is the same as that used for the substance in Annex I to Directive 67/548/EEC.
            Whenever possible dangerous substances are designated by their EINECS (European
            Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemical Substances) or ELINCS (European List of
            Notified Chemical Substances) names. These are referred to as EC numbers in the table.
            Other entries not listed in EINECS or ELINCS are designated using an internationally
            recognised chemical name (e.g. ISO, IUPAC). An additional common name is included in
            some cases.

            Index number:

            The index number is the identification code given to the substance in Annex I of
            Directive 67/548/EEC. Substances are listed in the Appendix according to this index
            number.
30.12.2006        EN              Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/443


         EINECS number:

         For each substance listed in the EINECS there is an identification code. The code starts
         at 200-001 8.

         ELINCS number

         For each new substance notified under the Directive 67/548/EEC an identification code has
         been defined and published in the ELINCS. The code starts at 400-010-9.

         CAS number:

         Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) numbers have been defined for substances to help in
         their identification.

         Notes:

         The full text of the notes can be found in the Foreword of Annex I to
         Directive 67/548/EEC.

         The notes to be taken into account for the purposes of this Regulation are the following:

         Note A:

         The name of the substance must appear on the label in the form of one of the designations
         given in Annex I to Directive 67/548/EEC (see Article 23(2)(a) of that Directive).
L 396/444          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


            In Annex I to Directive 67/548/EEC, use is sometimes made of a general description such
            as "…compounds" or "…salts". In this case, the manufacturer or any other person who
            places such a substance on the market is required to state on the label the correct name, due
            account being taken of the Chapter entitled "Nomenclature" of the Foreword to that Annex.

            Directive 67/548/EEC also requires that the symbols, indications of danger, R- and
            S-phrases to be used for each substance shall be those shown in Annex I to that
            Directive (Article 23(2)(c), (d) and (e) of that Directive).

            For substances belonging to one particular group of substances included in Annex I to
            Directive 67/548/EEC, the symbols, indications of danger, R- and S-phrases to be used for
            each substance shall be those shown in the appropriate entry in that Annex.

            For substances belonging to more than one group of substances included in Annex I to
            Directive 67/548/EEC, the symbols, indications of danger, R- and S-phrases to be used for
            each substance shall be those shown in both the appropriate entries given in that Annex. In
            cases where two different classifications are given in the two entries for the same hazard,
            the classification reflecting the more severe hazard classification shall be used.

            Note C:

            Some organic substances may be marketed either in a specific isomeric form or as a
            mixture of several isomers.
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/445


         Note D:

         Certain substances which are susceptible to spontaneous polymerisation or decomposition
         are generally placed on the market in a stabilised form. It is in this form that they are listed
         in Annex I to Directive 67/548/EEC.

         However, such substances are sometimes placed on the market in a non-stabilised form. In
         this case, the manufacturer or any person who places such a substance on the market must
         state on the label the name of the substance followed by the words "non-stabilised".

         Note E:

         Substances with specific effects on human health (see chapter 4 of Annex VI of
         Directive 67/548/EEC) that are classified as carcinogenic, mutagenic and/or toxic for
         reproduction in categories 1 or 2 are ascribed Note E if they are also classified as very
         toxic (T+), toxic (T) or harmful (Xn). For these substances, the risk phrases R20, R21,
         R22, R23, R24, R25, R26, R27, R28, R39, R68 (harmful), R48 and R65 and all
         combinations of these risk phrases shall be preceded by the word "Also".

         Note H:

         The classification and label shown for this substance applies to the dangerous property(ies)
         indicated by the risk phrase(s) in combination with the category(ies) of danger shown. The
         requirements of Article 6 of Directive 67/548/EEC on manufacturers, distributors, and
         importers of this substance apply to all other aspects of classification and labelling. The
         final label shall follow the requirements of section 7 of Annex VI to Directive
         67/548/EEC.

         This note applies to certain coal- and oil-derived substances and to certain entries for
         groups of substances in Annex I to Directive 67/548/EEC.
L 396/446             EN             Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


            Note J:

            The classification as a carcinogen need not apply if it can be shown that the substance
            contains less than 0,1 % w/w benzene (EINECS No 200-753-7).

            Note K:

            The classification as a carcinogen or mutagen need not apply if it can be shown that the
            substance contains less than 0,1 % w/w 1,3-butadiene (EINECS No 203-450-8). If the
            substance is not classified as a carcinogen or mutagen, at least the S-phrases (2-)9-16
            should apply. This note applies to certain complex oil-derived substances in Annex I to
            Directive 67/548/EC

            Note L:

            The classification as a carcinogen need not apply if it can be shown that the substance
            contains less than 3 % DMSO extract as measured by IP 346.

            Note M:

            The classification as a carcinogen need not apply if it can be shown that the substance
            contains less than 0,005 % w/w benzo[a]-pyrene (EINECS No 200-028-5).
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/447


         Note N:

         The classification as a carcinogen need not apply if the full refining history is known and it
         can be shown that the substance from which it is produced is not a carcinogen.

         Note P:

         The classification as a carcinogen need not apply if it can be shown that the substance
         contains less than 0,1 % w/w benzene (EINECS No 200-753-7).

         Note R:

         The classification as a carcinogen need not apply to fibres with a length weighted
         geometric mean diameter, less two standard errors, greater than 6μm.

         Note S:

         This substance may not require a label according to Article 23 of Directive 67/548/EEC
         (see section 8 of Annex VI of that Directive).
L 396/448         EN               Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


                                               Appendix 1

                                 Point 28 – Carcinogens: category 1

              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Chromium (VI) trioxide                     024-001-00-0        215-607-8    1333-82-0    E

Zinc chromates including zinc              024-007-00-3
potassium chromate

Nickel monoxide                            028-003-00-2        215-215-7    1313-99-1

Nickel dioxide                             028-004-00-8        234-823-3    12035-36-8

Dinickel trioxide                          028-005-00-3        215-217-8    1314-06-3

Nickel sulphide                            028-006-00-9        240-841-2    16812-54-7

Nickel subsulphide                         028-007-00-4        234-829-6    12035-72-2

Diarsenic trioxide; arsenic trioxide       033-003-00-0        215-481-4    1327-53-3

Arsenic pentoxide; arsenic oxide           033-004-00-6        215-116-9    1303-28-2

Arsenic acid and its salts                 033-005-00-1

Lead hydrogen arsenate                     082-011-00-0        232-064-2    7784-40-9
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/449


             Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number     Notes

Butane [containing ≥0,1 % Butadiene      601-004-01-8        203-448-7    106-97-8 [1]   C, S
(203-450-8)] [1]                                             [1]

Isobutane [containing ≥0,1 %                                 200-857-2    75-28-5 [2]
Butadiene (203-450-8)] [2]                                   [2]

1,3-Butadiene; buta-1,3-diene            601-013-00-X        203-450-8    106-99-0       D

Benzene                                  601-020-00-8        200-753-7    71-43-2        E

Triethyl arsenate                        601-067-00-4        427-700-2    15606-95-8

Vinyl chloride; chloroethylene           602-023-00-7        200-831-0    75-01-4

Bis (chloromethyl) ether                 603-046-00-5        208-832-8    542-88-1

Chloromethyl methyl ether;               603-075-00-3        203-480-1    107-30-2
chlorodimethyl ether
L 396/450        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number    Notes

2-Naphthylamine; beta-naphthylamine 612-022-00-3               202-080-4    91-59-8       E

Benzidine; 4,4′-diaminobiphenyl;           612-042-00-2        202-199-1    92-87-5       E
biphenyl-4,4′-ylenediamine

Salts of benzidine                         612-070-00-5

Salts of 2-naphthylamine                   612-071-00-0        209-030-     553-00-4[1]
                                                               0[1]
                                                                            612-52-2[2]
                                                               210-313-
                                                               6[2]

Biphenyl-4-ylamine; xenylamine;            612-072-00-6        202-177-1    92-67-1
4-aminobiphenyl

Salts of biphenyl-4-ylamine; salts of      612-073-00-1
xenylamine; salts of 4-aminobiphenyl

Tar, coal; Coal tar                        648-081-00-7        232-361-7    8007-45-2

(The by-product from the destructive
distillation of coal. Almost black
semisolid. A complex combination of
aromatic hydro-carbons, phenolic
compounds, nitrogen bases and
thiophene.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/451


              Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Tar, coal, high-temp.; Coal tar           648-082-00-2        266-024-0    65996-89-6

(The condensation product obtained
by cooling, to approximately ambient
temperature, the gas evolved in the
high temperature (greater than 700°C)
destructive distillation of coal. A
black viscous liquid denser than
water. Composed primarily of a
complex mixture of condensed ring
aromatic hydrocarbons. May contain
minor amounts of phenolic
compounds and aromatic nitrogen
bases.)

Tar, coal, low-temp.; Coal oil            648-083-00-8        266-025-6    65996-90-9

(The condensation product obtained
by cooling, to approximately ambient
temperature, the gas evolved in low
temperature (less than 700°C)
destructive distillation of coal. A
black viscous liquid denser than
water. Composed primarily of
condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons, phenolic compounds,
aromatic nitrogen bases, and their
alkyl derivatives.)
L 396/452         EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number        EC number    CAS number    Notes

Tar brown-coal;                             648-145-00-4        309-885-0    101316-83-0

(An oil distilled from brown-coal tar.
Composed primarily of aliphatic,
naphthenic and one- to three-ring
aromatic hydrocarbons, their alkyl
derivates, heteroaromatics and
one- and two-ring phenols boiling in
the range of approximately 150°C to
360°C.)

Tar, brown-coal, low temp.;                 648-146-00-X        309-886-6    101316-84-1

(A tar obtained from low temperature
carbonisation and low temperature
gasification of brown coal. Composed
primarily of aliphatic, naphthenic and
cyclic aromatic hydrocarbons,
heteroaromatic hydrocarbons and
cyclic phenols.)

Distillates (petroleum), light          649-050-00-0            265-051-5    64741-50-0
paraffinic; Unrefined or mildly refined
base oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by vacuum
distillation of the residuum from
atmospheric distillation of crude oil. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C15 through C30 and produces
a finished oil with a viscosity of less
than 19 10-6 m2.s-1 at 40°C. It contains
a relatively large proportion of
saturated aliphatic hydrocarbons
normally present in this distillation
range of crude oil.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/453


              Substances                    Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), heavy          649-051-00-6            265-052-0    64741-51-1
paraffinic; Unrefined or mildly refined
base oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by vacuum
distillation of the residuum from
atmospheric distillation of crude oil. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C20 through C50, and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of at least 19 10-6 m2.s-1 at
40°C. It contains a relatively large
proportion of saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons.)

Distillates (petroleum), light              649-052-00-1        265-053-6    64741-52-2
naphthenic; Unrefined or mildly
refined base oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by vacuum
distillation of the residuum from
atmospheric distillation of crude oil. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C15 through C30, and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of less than 19 10-6 m2.s-1 at
40°C. It contains relatively few
normal paraffins.)
L 396/454        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), heavy              649-053-00-7        265-054-1    64741-53-3
naphthenic; Unrefined or mildly
refined base oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by vacuum
distillation of the residuum from
atmospheric distillation of crude oil. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C20 through C50, and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of at least 19 10-6 m2.s-1 at
40°C. It contains relatively few
normal paraffins.)

Distillates (petroleum), acid-treated       649-054-00-2        265-117-3    64742-18-3
heavy naphthenic; Unrefined or
mildly refined base oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a raffinate
from a sulfuric acid treating process. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C20 through C50, and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of at least 19 10-6 m2.s-1 at
40°C. It contains relatively few
normal paraffins.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/455


              Substances                    Index number       EC number    CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), acid-treated       649-055-00-8       265-118-9    64742-19-4
light naphthenic; Unrefined or mildly
refined base oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a raffinate
from a sulfuric acid treating process. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C15 through C30, and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of less than 19 10-6 m2.s-1 at
40°C. It contains relatively few
normal paraffins.)

Distillates (petroleum), acid-treated       649-056-00-3       265-119-4    64742-20-7
heavy paraffinic; Unrefined or mildly
refined base oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a raffinate
from a sulfuric acid process. It
consists predominantly of saturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50, and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity of at least 19 10-6
m2.s-1 at 40°C.)
L 396/456        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number       EC number    CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), acid-treated       649-057-00-9       265-121-5    64742-21-8
light paraffinic; Unrefined or mildly
refined base oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a raffinate
from a sulfuric acid treating process. It
consists predominantly of saturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C15
through C30 and produces a finished
oil having a viscosity of less than
19 10-6 m2.s-1 at 40°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), chemically         649-058-00-4       265-127-8    64742-27-4
neutralised heavy paraffinic;
Unrefined or mildly refined base oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a treating
process to remove acidic materials. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50, and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity of at least
19 10-6 m2.s-1 at 40°C. It contains a
relatively large proportion of aliphatic
hydrocarbons.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/457


              Substances                    Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), chemically         649-059-00-X        265-128-3    64742-28-5
neutralised light paraffinic; Unrefined
or mildly refined base oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by a treating
process to remove acidic materials. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C15 through C30, and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of less than 19 10-6 m2.s-1 at
40°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), chemically         649-060-00-5        265-135-1    64742-34-3
neutralised heavy naphthenic;
Unrefined or mildly refined base oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by a treating
process to remove acidic materials. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C20 through C50, and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of at least 19 10-6 m2.s-1 at
40°C. It contains relatively few
normal paraffins.)
L 396/458        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), chemically         649-061-00-0        265-136-7    64742-35-4
neutralised light naphthenic;
Unrefined or mildly refined base oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by a treating
process to remove acidic materials. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C15 through C30, and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of less than 19 10-6 m2.s-1 at
40°C. It contains relatively few
normal paraffins.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic cracked        649-062-00-6        270-755-0    68477-73-6   H, K
naphtha depropaniser overhead,
C3-rich acid-free; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of catalytic cracked
hydrocarbons and treated to remove
acidic impurities. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C2 through C4,
predominantly C3.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic cracker;       649-063-00-1        270-756-6    68477-74-7   H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of the products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
predominantly of aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/459


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), catalytic cracker,      649-064-00-7        270-757-1    68477-75-8   H, K
C1-5-rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
of aliphatic hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C1
through C6, predominantly C1 through
C5.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic polymd.       649-065-00-2        270-758-7    68477-76-9   H, K
naphtha stabiliser overhead, C2-4-rich;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation stabilisation of catalytic
polymerised naphtha. It consists of
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C2 through
C6, predominantly C2 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic reformer,     649-066-00-8        270-760-8    68477-79-2   H, K
C1-4-rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from a catalytic reforming
process. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in the range of
C1 through C6, predominantly C1
through C4.)
L 396/460        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), C3-5                    649-067-00-3        270-765-5    68477-83-8$   H, K
olefinic-paraffinic alkylation feed;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of olefinic
and paraffinic hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C3
through C5 which are used as
alkylation feed. Ambient temperatures
normally exceed the critical
temperature of these combinations.)

Gases (petroleum), C4-rich; Petroleum      349-068-00-9        270-767-6    68477-85-0    H, K
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from a catalytic
fractionation process. It consists of
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C3 through
C5, predominantly C4.)

Gases (petroleum), deethaniser             649-069-00-4        270-768-1    68477-86-1    H, K
overheads; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced from
distillation of the gas and gasoline
fractions from the catalytic cracking
process. It contains predominantly
ethane and ethylene.)
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/461


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), deisobutaniser          649-070-00-X        270-769-7    68477-87-2   H, K
tower overheads; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
atmospheric distillation of a
butane-butylene stream. It consists of
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C3 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), depropaniser dry,       649-071-00-5        270-772-3    68477-90-7   H, K
propene-rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from the gas
and gasoline fractions of a catalytic
cracking process. It consists
predominantly of propylene with
some ethane and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), depropaniser            649-072-00-0        270-773-9    68477-91-8   H, K
overheads; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from the gas and gasoline
fractions of a catalytic cracking
process. It consists of aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C2
through C4.)
L 396/462       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), gas recovery plant    649-073-00-6        270-777-0    68477-94-1   H, K
depropaniser overheads; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
fractionation of miscellaneous
hydrocarbon streams. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in the range of
C1 through C4, predominantly
propane.)

Gases (petroleum), Girbatol unit feed;   649-074-00-1        270-778-6    68477-95-2   H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons that is used as the feed
into the Girbatol unit to remove
hydrogen sulfide. It consists of
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C2 through C4.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/463


              Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), isomerised             649-075-00-7        270-782-8    68477-99-6   H, K
naphtha fractionator, C4-rich,
hydrogen sulfide-free; Petroleum gas

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic cracked   649-076-00-2        270-802-5    68478-21-7   H, K
clarified oil and thermal cracked
vacuum residue fractionation reflux
drum; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of catalytic cracked
clarified oil and thermal cracked
vacuum residue. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C6.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic cracked   649-077-00-8        270-803-0    68478-22-8   H, K
naphtha stabilisation absorber;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
stabilisation of catalytic cracked
naphtha. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)
L 396/464       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic cracker, 649-078-00-3          270-804-6    68478-24-0   H, K
catalytic reformer and
hydrodesulphuriser combined
fractionater; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation of products from
catalytic cracking, catalytic reforming
and hydrodesulphurising processes
treated to remove acidic impurities. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic            649-079-00-9        270-806-7    68478-26-2   H, K
reformed naphtha fractionation
stabiliser; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation stabilisation of catalytic
reformed naphtha. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C4.)
30.12.2006       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/465


              Substances                     Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), saturate gas           649-080-00-4        270-813-5    68478-32-0   H, K
plant mixed stream, C4-rich;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation stabilisation of
straight-run naphtha, distillation tail
gas and catalytic reformed naphtha
stabiliser tail gas. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C3 through C6,
predominantly butane and isobutane.)

Tail gas (petroleum), saturate gas           649-081-00-X        270-814-0    68478-33-1   H, K
recovery plant, C1-2-rich; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of distillate tail gas,
straight-run naphtha, catalytic
reformed naphtha stabiliser tail gas. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C1 through C5,
predominantly methane and ethane.)
L 396/466       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), vacuum residues    649-082-00-5        270-815-6    68478-34-2   H, K
thermal cracker; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
thermal cracking of vacuum residues.
It consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C5.)

Hydrocarbons, C3-4-rich, petroleum       649-083-00-0        270-990-9    68512-91-4   H, K
distillate; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
and condensation of crude oil. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C3
through C5, predominantly C3 through
C4.)

Gases (petroleum), full-range            649-084-00-6        271-000-8    68513-15-5   H, K
straight-run naphtha dehexaniser off;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
fractionation of the full-range
straight-run naphtha. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C2
through C6.)
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/467


             Substances                    Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), hydrocracking           649-085-00-1        271-001-3    68513-16-6   H, K
depropaniser off, hydrocarbon-rich;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbon produced by the
distillation of products from a
hydrocracking process. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C4. It may
also contain small amounts of
hydrogen and hydrogen sulfide.)

Gases (petroleum), light straight-run      649-086-00-7        271-002-9    68513-17-7   H, K
naphtha stabiliser off; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
stabilisation of light straight-run
naphtha. It consists of saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C2 through C6.)

Residues (petroleum), alkylation           649-087-00-2        271-010-2    68513-66-6   H, K
splitter, C4-rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex residuum from the
distillation of streams from various
refinery operations. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C4 through C5,
predominantly butane, and boiling in
the range of approximately −11,7 °C
to 27,8 °C.)
L 396/468        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


               Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Hydrocarbons, C1-4; Petroleum gas           649-088-00-8        271-032-2    68514-31-8   H, K

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons provided by thermal
cracking and absorber operations and
by distillation of crude oil. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4 and boiling in the
range of approximately minus 164 °C
to minus 0,5 °C.)

Hydrocarbons, C1-4, sweetened;              649-089-00-3        271-038-5    68514-36-3   H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting
hydrocarbon gases to a sweetening
process to convert mercaptans or to
remove acidic impurities. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4 and boiling in the
range of approximately − 164 °C to
− 0,5 °C.)

Hydrocarbons, C1-3; Petroleum gas           649-090-00-9        271-259-7    68527-16-2   H, K

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C3 and boiling in the range of
approximately − 164 °C to − 42 °C.)

Hydrocarbons, C1-4, debutaniser             649-091-00-4        271-261-8    68527-19-5   H, K
fraction; Petroleum gas
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/469


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), C1-5, wet;              649-092-00-X        271-624-0    68602-83-5   H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of crude oil and/or the
cracking of tower gas oil. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Hydrocarbons, C2-4; Petroleum gas          649-093-00-5        271-734-9    68606-25-7   H, K
L 396/470       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Hydrocarbons, C3; Petroleum gas           649-094-00-0        271-735-4    68606-26-8   H, K

Gases (petroleum), alkylation feed;       649-095-00-6        271-737-5    68606-27-9   H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
catalytic cracking of gas oil. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C3 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), depropaniser           649-096-00-1        271-742-2    68606-34-8   H, K
bottoms fractionation off; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation of depropaniser bottoms.
It consists predominantly of butane,
isobutane and butadiene.)

Gases (petroleum), refinery blend;        649-097-00-7        272-183-7    68783-07-3   H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination obtained
from various processes. It consists of
hydrogen, hydrogen sulfide and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/471


             Substances                    Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), catalytic cracking;     649-098-00-2        272-203-4    68783-64-2   H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of the products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C3 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), C2-4, sweetened;        649-099-00-8        272-205-5    68783-65-3   H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting a
petroleum distillate to a sweetening
process to convert mercaptans or to
remove acidic impurities. It consists
predominantly of saturated and
unsaturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C2 through C4 and boiling in
the range of approximately − 51 °C to
− 34 °C.)

Gases (petroleum), crude oil               649-100-00-1        272-871-7    68918-99-0   H, K
fractionation off; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
fractionation of crude oil. It consists
of saturated aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C5.)
L 396/472        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), dehexaniser off;        649-101-00-7        272-872-2    68919-00-6   H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
fractionation of combined naphtha
streams. It consists of saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), light straight run      649-102-00-2        272-878-5    68919-05-1   H, K
gasoline fractionation stabiliser off;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
fractionation of light straight-run
gasoline. It consists of saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), naphtha unifiner        649-103-00-8        272-879-0    68919-06-2   H, K
desulphurisation stripper off;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by a naphtha
unifiner desulphurisation process and
stripped from the naphtha product. It
consists of saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/473


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), straight-run            649-104-00-3        272-882-7    68919-09-5   H, K
naphtha catalytic reforming off;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the catalytic
reforming of straight-run naphtha and
fractionation of the total effluent. It
consists of methane, ethane, and
propane.)

Gases (petroleum), fluidised catalytic     649-105-00-9        272-893-7    68919-20-0   H, K
cracker splitter overheads; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
fractionation of the charge to the C3-
C4 splitter. It consists predominantly
of C3 hydrocarbons.)

Gases (petroleum), straight-run            649-106-00-4        272-883-2    68919-10-8   H, K
stabiliser off; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation of the liquid from the
first tower used in the distillation of
crude oil. It consists of saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4.)
L 396/474       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), catalytic cracked      649-107-00-X        273-169-3    68952-76-1   H, K
naphtha debutaniser; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of catalytic cracked
naphtha. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic cracked   649-108-00-5        273-170-9    68952-77-2   H, K
distillate and naphtha stabiliser;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
fractionation of catalytic cracked
naphtha and distillate. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum), thermal-cracked     649-109-00-0        273-175-6    68952-81-8   H, K
distillate, gas oil and naphtha
absorber; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
separation of thermal-cracked
distillates, naphtha and gas oil. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/475


              Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), thermal cracked     649-110-00-6        273-176-1    68952-82-9   H, K
hydrocarbon fractionation stabiliser,
petroleum coking; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation stabilisation of thermal
cracked hydrocarbons from a
petroleum coking process. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C6.)

Gases (petroleum, light steam-            649-111-00-1        273-265-5    68955-28-2   H, K
cracked, butadiene conc.; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a thermal
cracking process. It consists of
hydrocarbons having a carbon number
predominantly of C4.)
L 396/476       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number       EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), straight-run            649-112-00-7       273-270-2    68955-34-0   H, K
naphtha catalytic reformer stabiliser
overhead; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the catalytic
reforming of straight-run naphtha and
the fractionation of the total effluent.
It consists of saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C2
through C4.)

Hydrocarbons, C4; Petroleum gas            649-113-00-2       289-339-5    27741-01-3   H, K

Alkanes, C1-4, C3-rich; Petroleum gas      649-114-00-8       292-456-4    90622-55-2   H, K

Gases (petroleum), steam-cracker C3-       649-115-00-3       295-404-9    92045-22-2   H, K
rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a steam
cracking process. It consists
predominantly of propylene with
some propane and boils in the range of
approximately − 70 °C to 0 °C.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/477


              Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Hydrocarbons, C4, steam-cracker           649-116-00-9        295-405-4    92045-23-3   H, K
distillate; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of the products of a steam
cracking process. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having a carbon number of C4,
predominantly 1-butene and 2-butene,
containing also butane and isobutene
and boiling in the range of
approximately − 12 °C to 5 °C.)

Petroleum gases, liquefied, sweetened, 649-117-00-4           295-463-0    92045-80-2   H, K
C4 fraction; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting a
liquified petroleum gas mix to a
sweetening process to oxidise
mercaptans or to remove acidic
impurities. It consists predominantly
of C4 saturated and unsaturated
hydrocarbons.)
L 396/478       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Raffinates (petroleum), steam-cracked      649-119-00-5        307-769-4    97722-19-5   H, K
C4 fraction cuprous ammonium
acetate extn., C3-5 and C3-5
unsaturatedd., butadiene-free;
Petroleum gas

Gases (petroleum), amine system            649-112-00-0        270-746-1    68477-65-6   H, K
feed; Refinery gas

(The feed gas to the amine system for
removal of hydrogen sulphide. It
consists primarily of hydrogen.
Carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide,
hydrogen sulfide and aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5 may also be present.)

Gases (petroleum), benzene unit            649-121-00-6        270-747-7    68477-66-7   H, K
hydrodesulphuriser off; Refinery gas

(Off gases produced by the benzene
unit. It consists primarily of hydrogen.
Carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C6,
including benzene, may also be
present.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/479


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), benzene unit            649-122-00-1        270-748-2    68477-67-8   H, K
recycle, hydrogen-rich; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by recycling
the gases of the benzene unit. It
consists primarily of hydrogen with
various small amounts of carbon
monoxide and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C1
through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), blend oil,              649-123-00-7        270-749-8    68477-68-9   H, K
hydrogen-nitrogen-rich; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
of a blend oil. It consists primarily of
hydrogen and nitrogen with various
small amounts of carbon monoxide,
carbon dioxide, and aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic reformed      649-124-00-2        270-759-2    68477-77-0   H, K
naphtha stripper overheads; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
stabilisation of catalytic reformed
naphtha. It consists of hydrogen and
saturated hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4.)
L 396/480       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), C6-8 catalytic           649-125-00-8        270-760-3    68477-80-5   H, K
reformer recycle; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from catalytic reforming
of C6-C8 feed and recycled to conserve
hydrogen. It consists primarily of
hydrogen. It may also contain various
small amounts of carbon monoxide,
carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), C6-8 catalytic           649-126-00-3        270-762-9    68477-81-6   H, K
reformer; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from catalytic reforming
of C6-C8 feed. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C1 through C5 and
hydrogen.)
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/481


              Substances                    Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), C6-8 catalytic           649-127-00-9        270-763-4    68477-82-7   H, K
reformer recycle, hydrogen-rich;
Refinery gas

Gases (petroleum), C2-return stream;        649-128-00-4        270-766-0    68477-84-9   H, K
Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
extraction of hydrogen from a gas
stream which consists primarily of
hydrogen with small amounts of
nitrogen, carbon monoxide, methane,
ethane, and ethylene. It contains
predominantly hydrocarbons such as
methane, ethane, and ethylene with
small amounts of hydrogen, nitrogen
and carbon monoxide.)

Gases (petroleum), dry sour,                649-129-00-X        270-774-4    68477-92-9   H, K
gas-concentration-unit-off; Refinery
gas

(The complex combination of dry
gases from a gas concentration unit. It
consists of hydrogen, hydrogen
sulphide and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C3.)
L 396/482       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), gas concentration     649-130-00-5        270-776-5    68477-93-0   H, K
reabsorber distillation; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from combined gas
streams in a gas concentration
reabsorber. It consists predominantly
of hydrogen, carbon monoxide,
carbon dioxide, nitrogen, hydrogen
sulphide and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C1
through C3.)

Gases (petroleum), hydrogen absorber     649-131-00-0        270-779-1    68477-96-3   H, K
off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained by
absorbing hydrogen from a hydrogen
rich stream. It consists of hydrogen,
carbon monoxide, nitrogen, and
methane with small amounts of C2
hydrocarbons.)

Gases (petroleum), hydrogen-rich;        649-132-00-6        270-780-7    68477-97-4   H, K
Refinery gas

(A complex combination separated as
a gas from hydrocarbon gases by
chilling. It consists primarily of
hydrogen with various small amounts
of carbon monoxide, nitrogen,
methane, and C2 hydrocarbons.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/483


              Substances                   Index number       EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), hydrotreater blend      649-133-00-1       270-781-2    68477-98-5   H, K
oil recycle, hydrogen-nitrogen-rich;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from recycled hydrotreated blend oil.
It consists primarily of hydrogen and
nitrogen with various small amounts
of carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide
and hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), recycle,                649-134-00-7       270-783-3    68478-00-2   H, K
hydrogen-rich; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from recycled reactor gases. It consists
primarily of hydrogen with various
small amounts of carbon monoxide,
carbon dioxide, nitrogen, hydrogen
sulphide, and saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C1 through C5.)
L 396/484       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), reformer make-up,     649-135-00-2        270-784-9    68478-01-3   H, K
hydrogen-rich; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from the reformers. It consists
primarily of hydrogen with various
small amounts of carbon monoxide
and aliphatic hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), reforming             649-136-00-8        270-785-4    68478-02-4   H, K
hydrotreater; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from the reforming hydrotreating
process. It consists primarily of
hydrogen, methane, and ethane with
various small amounts of hydrogen
sulphide and aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range C3 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), reforming             649-137-00-3        270-787-5    68478-03-5   H, K
hydrotreater, hydrogen-methane-rich;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from the reforming hydrotreating
process. It consists primarily of
hydrogen and methane with various
small amounts of carbon monoxide,
carbon dioxide, nitrogen and saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C2 through C5.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/485


              Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), reforming              649-138-00-9        270-788-0    68478-04-6   H, K
hydrotreater make-up, hydrogen-rich;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from the reforming hydrotreating
process. It consists primarily of
hydrogen with various small amounts
of carbon monoxide and aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), thermal cracking       649-139-00-4        270-789-6    68478-05-7   H, K
distillation; Refinery gas

(A complex combination produced by
distillation of products from a thermal
cracking process. It consists of
hydrogen, hydrogen sulphide, carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic cracker   649-140-00-X        270-805-1    68478-25-1   H, K
refractionation absorber; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
refractionation of products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
of hydrogen and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C3.)
L 396/486       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic            649-141-00-5        270-807-2    68478-27-3   H, K
reformed naphtha separator; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
catalytic reforming of straight-run
naphtha. It consists of hydrogen and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic            649-142-00-0        270-808-8    68478-28-4   H, K
reformed naphtha stabiliser; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
stabilisation of catalytic reformed
naphtha. It consists of hydrogen and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)

Tail gas (petroleum), cracked distillate 649-143-00-6          270-809-3    68478-29-5   H, K
hydrotreater separator; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating
cracked distillates with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It consists
of hydrogen and saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/487


             Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),                     649-144-00-1        270-810-9    68478-30-8   H, K
hydrodesulphurised straight-run
naphtha separator; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
hydrodesulphurisation of straight-run
naphtha. It consists of hydrogen and
saturated aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic reformed     649-145-00-7        270-999-8    68513-14-4   H, K
straight-run naphtha stabiliser
overheads; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
catalytic reforming of straight-run
naphtha followed by fractionation of
the total effluent. It consists of
hydrogen, methane, ethane and
propane.)
L 396/488       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), reformer effluent      649-146-00-2        271-003-4    68513-18-8   H, K
high-pressure flash drum off; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination produced by
the high-pressure flashing of the
effluent from the reforming reactor. It
consists primarily of hydrogen with
various small amounts of methane,
ethane, and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), reformer effluent      649-147-00-8        271-005-5    68513-19-9   H, K
low-pressure flash drum off; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination produced by
low-pressure flashing of the effluent
from the reforming reactor. It consists
primarily of hydrogen with various
small amounts of methane, ethane,
and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), oil refinery gas       649-148-00-3        271-258-1    68527-15-1   H, K
distillation off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination separated by
distillation of a gas stream containing
hydrogen, carbon monoxide, carbon
dioxide and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C1
through C6 or obtained by cracking
ethane and propane. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C2, hydrogen, nitrogen, and
carbon monoxide.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/489


              Substances                    Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), benzene unit             649-149-00-9        271-623-5    68602-82-4   H, K
hydrotreater depentaniser overheads;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination produced by
treating the feed from the benzene unit
with hydrogen in the presence of a
catalyst followed by depentanising. It
consists primarily of hydrogen, ethane
and propane with various small
amounts of nitrogen, carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6. It may contain trace
amounts of benzene.)

Gases (petroleum), secondary                649-150-00-4        271-625-6    68602-84-6   H, K
absorber off, fluidised catalytic
cracker overheads fractionator;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination produced by
the fractionation of the overhead
products from the catalytic cracking
process in the fluidised catalytic
cracker. It consists of hydrogen,
nitrogen, and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C3.)
L 396/490       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Petroleum products, refinery gases;       649-151-00-X        271-750-6    68607-11-4   H, K
Refinery gas

(A complex combination which
consists primarily of hydrogen with
various small amounts of methane,
ethane and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), hydrocracking          649-152-00-5        272-182-1    68783-06-2   H, K
low-pressure separator; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained by
the liquid-vapour separation of the
hydrocracking process reactor
effluent. It consists predominantly of
hydrogen and saturated hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C3.)

Gases (petroleum), refinery; Refinery     649-153-00-0        272-338-9    68814-67-5   H, K
gas

(A complex combination obtained
from various petroleum refining
operations. It consists of hydrogen and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C3.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/491


              Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), platformer             649-154-00-6        272-343-6    68814-90-4   H, K
products separator off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from the chemical reforming of
naphthenes to aromatics. It consists of
hydrogen and saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C2
through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), hydrotreated sour      649-155-00-1        272-775-5    68911-58-0   H, K
kerosine depentaniser stabiliser off;
Refinery gas

(The complex combination obtained
from the depentaniser stabilisation of
hydrotreated kerosine. It consists
primarily of hydrogen, methane,
ethane, and propane with various
small amounts of nitrogen, hydrogen
sulphide, carbon monoxide and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C5.)
L 396/492       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), hydrotreated sour       649-156-00-7        272-776-0    68911-59-1   H, K
kerosine flash drum; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from the flash drum of the unit
treating sour kerosine with hydrogen
in the presence of a catalyst. It
consists primarily of hydrogen and
methane with various small amounts
of nitrogen, carbon monoxide, and
hydro-carbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C2
through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), distillate unifiner     649-157-00-2        272-873-8    68919-01-7   H, K
desulphurisation stripper off; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination stripped
from the liquid product of the unifiner
desulphurisation process. It consists of
hydrogen sulphide, methane, ethane,
and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), fluidised catalytic     649-158-00-8        272-874-3    68919-02-8   H, K
cracker fractionation off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination produced by
the fractionation of the overhead
product of the fluidised catalytic
cracking process. It consists of
hydrogen, hydrogen sulphide,
nitrogen, and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C5.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/493


               Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), fluidised catalytic      649-159-00-3        272-875-9    68919-03-9   H, K
cracker scrubbing secondary absorber
off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination produced by
scrubbing the overhead gas from the
fluidised catalytic cracker. It consists
of hydrogen, nitrogen, methane,
ethane and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), heavy distillate         649-160-00-9        272-876-4    68919-04-0   H, K
hydrotreater desulphurisation stripper
off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination stripped
from the liquid product of the heavy
distillate hydrotreater desulphurisation
process. It consists of hydrogen,
hydrogen sulphide, and saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), platformer               649-161-00-4        272-880-6    68919-07-3   H, K
stabiliser off, light ends fractionation;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained by
the fractionation of the light ends of
the platinum reactors of the platformer
unit. It consists of hydrogen, methane,
ethane and propane.)
L 396/494        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


               Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), preflash tower off,      649-162-00-X        272-881-1    68919-08-4   H, K
crude distillation; Refinery gas

(A complex combination produced
from the first tower used in the
distillation of crude oil. It consists of
nitrogen and saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), tar stripper off;        649-163-00-5        272-884-8    68919-11-9   H, K
Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained by
the fractionation of reduced crude oil.
It consists of hydrogen and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), unifiner stripper        649-164-00-0        272-885-3    68919-12-0   H, K
off; Refinery gas

(A combination of hydrogen and
methane obtained by fractionation of
the products from the unifiner unit.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/495


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic       649-165-00-6             273-173-5    68952-79-4   H, K
hydrodesulphurised naphtha separator;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
hydrodesulphurisation of naphtha. It
consists of hydrogen, methane, ethane,
and propane.)

Tail gas (petroleum), straight-run         649-166-00-1        273-174-0    68952-80-7   H, K
naphtha hydrodesulphuriser; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination obtained
from the hydrodesulphurisation of
straight-run naphtha. It consists of
hydrogen and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), sponge absorber         649-167-00-7        273-269-7    68955-33-9   H, K
off, fluidised catalytic cracker and gas
oil desulphuriser overhead
fractionation; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained by
the fractionation of products from the
fluidised catalytic cracker and gas oil
desulphuriser. It consists of hydrogen
and hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4.)
L 396/496       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), crude distillation     649-168-00-2        273-563-5    68989-88-8   H, K
and catalytic cracking; Refinery gas

(A complex combination produced by
crude distillation and catalytic
cracking processes. It consists of
hydrogen, hydrogen sulphide,
nitrogen, carbon monoxide and
paraffinic and olefinic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), gas oil                649-169-00-8        295-397-2    92045-15-3   H, K
diethanolamine scrubber off; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination produced by
desulphurisation of gas oils with
diethanolamine. It consists
predominantly of hydrogen sulphide,
hydrogen and aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in the range of
C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), gas oil                649-170-00-3        295-398-8    92045-16-4   H, K
hydrodesulphurisation effluent;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained by
separation of the liquid phase from the
effluent from the hydrogenation
reaction. It consists predominantly of
hydrogen, hydrogen sulphide and
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C3.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/497


             Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), gas oil            649-171-00-9            295-399-3    92045-17-5   H, K
hydrodesulphurisation purge; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination of gases
obtained from the reformer and from
the purges from the hydrogenation
reactor. It consists predominantly of
hydrogen and aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), hydrogenator           649-172-00-4        295-400-7    92045-18-6   H, K
effluent flash drum off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of gases
obtained from flash of the effluents
after the hydrogenation reaction. It
consists predominantly of hydrogen
and aliphatic hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C6.)
L 396/498       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), naphtha steam          649-173-00-X        295-401-2    92045-19-7   H, K
cracking high-pressure residual;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained as a
mixture of the non-condensable
portions from the product of a naphtha
steam cracking process as well as
residual gases obtained during the
preparation of subsequent products. It
consists predominantly of hydrogen
and paraffinic and olefinic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5 with which natural gas
may also be mixed.)

Gases (petroleum), residue visbaking      649-174-00-5        295-402-8    92045-20-0   H, K
off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from viscosity reduction of residues in
a furnace. It consists predominantly of
hydrogen sulphide and paraffinic and
olefinic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/499


              Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), C3-4; Petroleum        649-177-00-1        268-629-5    68131-75-9   H, K
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from the cracking of crude
oil. It consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C3
through C4, predominantly of propane
and propylene, and boiling in the
range of approximately −51 °C to
−1 °C.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic cracked 649-178-00-7          269-617-2    68307-98-2   H, K
distillate and catalytic cracked naphtha
fractionation absorber; Petroleum gas

(The complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
the products from catalytic cracked
distillates and catalytic cracked
naphtha. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C1 through C4.)
L 396/500       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic            649-179-00-2        269-618-8    68307-99-3   H, K
polymerisation naphtha fractionation
stabiliser; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the fractionation
stabilisation products from
polymerisation of naphtha. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in the range of
C1 through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic            649-180-00-8        269-619-3    68308-00-9   H, K
reformed naphtha fractionation
stabiliser, hydrogen sulphide-free;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation stabilisation of catalytic
reformed naphtha and from which
hydrogen sulphide has been removed
by amine treatment. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C4.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/501


              Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), cracked distillate 649-181-00-3         269-620-9    68308-01-0   H, K
hydrotreater stripper; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating
thermal cracked distillates with
hydrogen in the presence of a catalyst.
It consists predominantly of saturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)

Tail gas (petroleum), straight-run    649-182-00-9            269-630-3    68308-10-1   H, K
distillate hydrodesulphuriser,
hydrogen sulphide-free; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from catalytic
hydrodesulphurisation of straight run
distillates and from which hydrogen
sulphide has been removed by amine
treatment. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)
L 396/502        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), gas oil catalytic    649-183-00-4        269-623-5    68308-03-2   H, K
cracking absorber; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
distillation of products from the
catalytic cracking of gas oil. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum), gas recovery         649-184-00-X        269-624-0    68308-04-3   H, K
plant; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
products from miscellaneous
hydrocarbon streams. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum), gas recovery         649-185-00-5        269-625-6    68308-05-4   H, K
plant deethaniser; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
products from miscellaneous
hydrocarbon streams. It consists of
hydrocarbon having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/503


              Substances                  Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),                     649-186-00-0        269-626-1    68308-06-5   H, K
hydrodesulphurised distillate and
hydrodesulphurised naphtha
fractionator, acid-free; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of hydrodesulphurised
naphtha and distillate hydrocarbon
streams and treated to remove acidic
impurities. It consists predominantly
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum),                     649-187-00-6        269-627-7    68308-07-6   H, K
hydrodesulphurised vacuum gas oil
stripper, hydrogen sulphide-free;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from stripping
stabilisation of catalytic
hydrodesulphurised vacuum gas oil
and from which hydrogen sulphide
has been removed by amine treatment.
It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)
L 396/504        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), light straight-run   649-188-00-1        269-629-8    68308-09-8   H, K
naphtha stabiliser, hydrogen sulphide-
free; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation stabilisation of light
straight-run naphtha and from which
hydrogen sulphide has been removed
by amine treatment. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum), propane-             649-189-00-7        269-631-9    68308-11-2   H, K
propylene alkylation feed prep
deethaniser; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
distillation of the reaction products of
propane with propylene. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/505


              Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), vacuum gas oil       649-190-00-2        269-632-4    68308-12-3   H, K
hydrodesulphuriser, hydrogen
sulphide-free; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from catalytic
hydrodesulphurisation of vacuum gas
oil and from which hydrogen sulphide
has been removed by amine treatment.
It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic cracked       649-191-00-8        270-071-2    68409-99-4   H, K
overheads; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from the
catalytic cracking process. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C3 through C5 and boiling in the
range of approximately −48 °C to 32
°C.)

Alkanes, C1-2; Petroleum gas               649-193-00-9        270-651-5    68475-57-0   H, K

Alkanes, C2-3; Petroleum gas               649-194-00-4        270-652-0    68475-58-1   H, K

Alkanes, C3-4; Petroleum gas               649-195-00-X        270-653-6    68475-59-2   H, K
L 396/506        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


               Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Alkanes, C4-5; Petroleum gas                649-196-00-5        270-654-1    68475-60-5   H, K

Fuel gases; Petroleum gas                   649-197-00-0        270-667-2    68476-26-6   H, K

(A combination of light gases. It
consists predominantly of hydrogen
and/or low molecular weight
hydrocarbons.)

Fuel gases, crude oil of distillates;       649-198-00-6        270-670-9    68476-29-9   H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of light
gases produced by distillation of crude
oil and by catalytic reforming of
naphtha. It consists of hydrogen and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4 and boiling in the range of
approximately − 217 °C to − 12 °C.)

Hydrocarbons, C3-4; Petroleum gas           649-199-00-1        270-681-9    68476-40-4   H, K

Hydrocarbons, C4-5; Petroleum gas           649-200-00-5        270-682-4    68476-42-6   H, K
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/507


              Substances                    Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Hydrocarbons, C2-4, C3-rich;                649-201-00-0        270-689-2    68476-49-3   H, K
Petroleum gas

Petroleum gases, liquefied; Petroleum       649-202-00-6        270-704-2    68476-85-7   H, K,
gas                                                                                       S

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of crude oil. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C3
through C7 and boiling in the range of
approximately −40 °C to 80 °C.)

Petroleum gases, liquefied, sweetened; 649-203-00-1             270-705-8    68476-86-8   H, K,
Petroleum gas                                                                             S

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting
liquefied petroleum gas mix to a
sweetening process to convert
mercaptans or to remove acidic
impurities. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C3 through C7 and
boiling in the range of approximately
−40 °C to 80 °C.)
L 396/508       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number       EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), C3-4, isobutane-        649-204-00-7       270-724-1    68477-33-8   H, K
rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
saturated and unsaturated
hydrocarbons usually ranging in
carbon numbers from C3 through C6,
predominantly butane and isobutane.
It consists of saturated and unsaturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C3 through C4,
predominantly isobutane.)

Distillates (petroleum), C3-6,             649-205-00-2       270-726-2    68477-35-0   H, K
piperylene-rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
saturated and unsaturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons usually ranging in the
carbon numbers C3 through C6. It
consists of saturated and unsaturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C3 through C6,
predominantly piperylenes.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                  L 396/509


             Substances                   Index number        EC number    CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), butane splitter        649-206-00-8        270-750-3    68477-69-0   H, K
overheads; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
distillation of the butane stream. It
consists of aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C3 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), C2-3; Petroleum        649-207-00-3        270-751-9    68477-70-3   H, K
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a
catalytic fractionation process. It
contains predominantly ethane,
ethylene, propane, and propylene.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic-cracked      649-208-00-9        270-752-4    68477-71-4   H, K
gas oil depropaniser bottoms, C4-rich
acid-free; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of catalytic cracked gas
oil hydrocarbon stream and treated to
remove hydrogen sulphide and other
acidic components. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C3 through C5,
predominantly C4.)
L 396/510       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                  30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number        EC number    CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), catalytic-cracked        649-209-00-4        270-754-5    68477-72-5    H, K
naphtha debutaniser bottoms,
C3-5-rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
stabilisation of catalytic cracked
naphtha. It consists of aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C3
through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum), isomerised            649-210-00-X        269-628-2    68308-08-7    H, K
naphtha fractionation stabiliser;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation stabilisation products
from isomerised naphtha. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers predominantly
in the range of C1 through C4.)

Erionite                                    650-012-00-0                     12510-42-8

Asbestos                                    650-013-00-6                     12001-29-5

                                                                             12001-28-4



                                                                             132207-32-0

                                                                             12172-73-5

                                                                             77536-66-4

                                                                             77536-68-6

                                                                             77536-67-5
30.12.2006         EN             Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/511


                                              Appendix 2

                                 Point 28 – Carcinogens: category 2

              Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Beryllium                                004-001-00-7         231-150-7    7440-41-7

Beryllium compounds with the             004-002-00-2
exception of aluminium beryllium
silicates

Beryllium oxide                          004-003-00-8         215-133-1    1304-56-9    E

Sulfallate (ISO); 2-chlorallyl           006-038-00-4         202-388-9    95-06-7
diethyldithiocarbamate

Dimethylcarbamoyl chloride               006-041-00-0         201-208-6    79-44-7

Diazomethane                             006-068-00-8         206-382-7    334-88-3

Hydrazine                                007-008-00-3         206-114-9    302-01-2     E

N,N-Dimethylhydrazine                    007-012-00-5         200-316-0    57-14-7

1,2-Dimethylhydrazine                    007-013-00-0                      540-73-8     E

Salts of hydrazine                       007-014-00-6

Isobutyl nitrite                         007-017-00-2         208-819-7    542-56-3     E
L 396/512      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Hydrazobenzene; 1,2-                    007-021-00-4         204-563-5    122-66-7
diphenylhydrazine

Hydrazine bis(3-carboxy-4-              007-022-00-X         405-030-1
hydroxybenzensulfonate)

Hexamethylphosphoric triamide;          015-106-00-2         211-653-8    680-31-9
hexamethylphosphoramide

Dimethyl sulphate                       016-023-00-4         201-058-1    77-78-1      E

Diethyl sulphate                        016-027-00-6         200-589-6    64-67-5

1,3-Propanesultone                      016-032-00-3         214-317-9    1120-71-4

Dimethylsulfamoylchloride               016-033-00-9         236-412-4    13360-57-1
30.12.2006     EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/513


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Potassium dichromate                    024-002-00-6         231-906-6    7778-50-9    E

Ammonium dichromate                     024-003-00-1         232-143-1    7789-09-5    E

Sodium dichromate anhydrate             024-004-00-7         234-190-3    10588-01-9   E

Sodium dichromate, dihydrate            024-004-01-4         234-190-3    7789-12-0    E

Chromyl dichloride; chromic             024-005-00-2         239-056-8    14977-61-8
oxychloride

Potassium chromate                      024-006-00-8         232-140-5    7789-00-6

Calcium chromate                        024-008-00-9         237-366-8    13765-19-0

Strontium chromate                      024-009-00-4         232-142-6    7789-06-2

Chromium III chromate; chromic          024-010-00-X         246-356-2    24613-89-6
chromate

Chromium (VI) compounds, with the       024-017-00-8         –            –
exception of barium chromate and of
compounds specified elsewhere in
Annex I to Directive 67/548/EEC
L 396/514         EN      Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances           Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Sodium chromate                  024-018-00-3         231-889-5    7775-11-3    E

Cobalt dichloride                027-004-00-5         231-589-4    7646-79-9    E

Cobalt sulphate                  027-005-00-0         233-334-2    10124-43-3   E

Potassium bromate                035-003-00-6         231-829-8    7758-01-2

Cadmium oxide                    048-002-00-0         215-146-2    1306-19-0    E

Cadmium fluoride                 048-006-00-2         232-222-0    7790-79-6    E

Cadmium chloride                 048-008-00-3         233-296-7    10108-64-2   E

Cadmium sulphate                 048-009-00-9         233-331-6    10124-36-4   E

Cadmium sulphide                 048-010-00-4         215-147-8    1306-23-6    E

Cadmium (pyrophoric)             048-011-00-X         231-152-8    7440-43-9    E
30.12.2006       EN            Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/515


              Substances               Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Isoprene (stabilised)                 601-014-00-5         201-143-3    78-79-5      D

2-Methyl-1,3-butadiene

Benzo[a]pyrene; benzo[d,e,f]chrysene 601-032-00-3          200-028-5    50-32-8

Benzo[a]anthracene                    601-033-00-9         200-280-6    56-55-3

Benzo[b]fluoranthene;                 601-034-00-4         205-911-9    205-99-2
benzo[e]acephenanthrylene

Benzo[j]fluoranthene                  601-035-00-X         205-910-3    205-82-3

Benzo[k]fluoranthene                  601-036-00-5         205-916-6    207-08-9

Dibenz[a,h]anthracene                 601-041-00-2         200-181-8    53-70-3

Chrysene                              601-048-00-0         205-923-4    218-01-9

Benzo[e]pyrene                        601-049-00-6         205-892-7    192-97-2

1,2-Dibromoethane; ethylene           602-010-00-6         203-444-5    106-93-4     E
dibromide

1,2-Dichloroethane; ethylene          602-012-00-7         203-458-1    107-06-2
dichloride
L 396/516       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane               602-021-00-6         202-479-3    96-12-8

Bromoethylene                             602-024-00-2         209-800-6    593-60-2

Trichloroethylene; trichloroethene        602-027-00-9         201-167-4    79-01-6

Chloroprene (stabilised)                  602-036-00-8         204-818-0    126-99-8     D, E

2-Chlorobuta-1,3-diene

α-Chlorotoluene; benzyl chloride          602-037-00-3         202-853-6    100-44-7     E

α,α,α-Trichlorotoluene;                   602-038-00-9         202-634-5    98-07-7
benzotrichloride

1,2,3-Trichloropropane                    602-062-00-X         202-486-1    96-18-4      D

1,3-Dichloro-2-propanol                   602-064-00-0         202-491-9    96-23-1

Hexachlorobenzene                         602-065-00-6         204-273-9    118-74-1

1,4-Dichlorobut-2-ene                     602-073-00-X         212-121-8    764-41-0     E

2,3-dibromopropan-1-ol;                   602-088-00-1         202-480-9    96-13-9      E
2,3-dibromo-1-propanol

α,α,α,4-Tetrachlorotoluene                602-093-00-9         226-009-1    5216-25-1    E

p-Chlorobenzotrichloride

Ethylene oxide; oxirane                   603-023-00-X         200-849-9    75-21-8

1-Chloro-2,3-epoxypropane;                603-026-00-6         203-439-8    106-89-8
epichlorhydrin
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/517


             Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Propylene oxide; 1,2-epoxypropane;         603-055-00-4         200-879-2    75-56-9      E
methyloxirane

2,2'-Bioxirane; 1,2:3,4-diepoxybutane      603-060-00-1         215-979-1    1464-53-5

2,3-Epoxypropan-1-ol; glycidol             603-063-00-8         209-128-3    556-52-5     E
oxiranemethanol

Phenyl glycidyl ether;                     603-067-00-X         204-557-2    122-60-1     E
2,3-epoxypropyl phenyl ether;
1,2-epoxy-3-phenoxypropane

Styrene oxide; (epoxyethyl)benzene;        603-084-00-2         202-476-7    96-09-3
phenyloxirane

Furan                                      603-105-00-5         203-727-3    110-00-9     E

R-2,3-epoxy-1-propanol                     603-143-00-2         404-660-4    57044-25-4   E

(R)-1-chloro-2,3-epoxypropane              603-166-00-8         424-280-2    51594-55-9

4-Amino-3-fluorophenol                     604-028-00-X         402-230-0    399-95-1

5-Allyl-1,3-benzodioxole; safrole          605-020-00-9         202-345-4    94-59-7      E

3-Propanolide; 1,3-propiolactone           606-031-00-1         200-340-1    57-57-8

4,4'-                                      606-073-00-0         202-027-5    90-94-8
Bis(dimethylamino)benzophenone

Michler's ketone

Urethane(INN); ethyl carbamate             607-149-00-6         200-123-1    51-79-6
L 396/518         EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                  30.12.2006


                Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number     Notes

Methyl acrylamidomethoxyacetate              607-190-00-X         401-890-7    77402-03-0
(containing ≥ 0,1 % acrylamide)

Methyl acrylamidoglycolate                   607-210-00-7         403-230-3    77402-05-2
(containing ≥ 0,1 % acrylamide)

Oxiranemethanol, 4-methylbenzene-            607-411-00-X         417-210-7    70987-78-9
sulfonate, (S)-

Acrylonitrile                                608-003-00-4         203-466-5    107-13-1       D,E

2-Nitropropane                               609-002-00-1         201-209-1    79-46-9

2,4-Dinitrotoluene [1];                      609-007-00-9         204-450-0    121-14-2 [1]   E
dinitrotoluene [2]; dinitrotoluene,                               [1]
technical grade                                                                25321-14-6
                                                                  246-836-1    [2]
                                                                  [2]

5-Nitroacenaphthene                          609-037-00-2         210-025-0    602-87-9

2-Nitronaphthalene                           609-038-00-8         209-474-5    581-89-5

4-Nitrobiphenyl                              609-039-00-3         202-204-7    92-93-3

Nitrofen (ISO); 2,4-dichlorophenyl4-         609-040-00-9         217-406-0    1836-75-5
nitrophenyl ether

2-Nitroanisole                               609-047-00-7         202-052-1    91-23-6

2,6-Dinitrotoluene                           609-049-00-8         210-106-0    606-20-2       E

2,3-dinitrotoluene                           609-050-00-3         210-013-5    602-01-7       E

3,4-dinitrotoluene                           609-051-00-9         210-222-1    610-39-9       E

3,5-dinitrotoluene                           609-052-00-4         210-566-2    618-85-9       E

Hydrazine-tri-nitromethane                   609-053-00-X         414-850-9    –

2,5-dinitrotoluene                           609-055-00-0         210-581-4    619-15-8       E

2-Nitrotoluene                               609-065-00-5         201-853-3    88-72-2        E

Azobenzene                                   611-001-00-6         203-102-5    103-33-3       E
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/519


             Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Methyl-ONN-azoxymethyl acetate;            611-004-00-2         209-765-7    592-62-1
methyl azoxy methyl acetate

Disodium {5-[(4′-((2,6-hydroxy-3-          611-005-00-8         240-221-1    16071-86-6
((2-hydroxy-5-
sulphophenyl)azo)phenyl)azo) (1,1′-
biphenyl)-4-yl)azo]salicylato(4-)}
cuprate(2-); CI Direct Brown 95

4-o-Tolylazo-o-toluidine; 4-amino-         611-006-00-3         202-591-2    97-56-3
2′,3-dimethylazobenzene; fast garnet
GBC base; AAT; o-aminoazotoluene

4-Aminoazobenzene                          611-008-00-4         200-453-6    60-09-3

Benzidine based azo dyes; 4,4'-            611-024-00-1         –            –
diarylazobiphenyl dyes, with the
exception of those specified
elsewhere in Annex I to
Directive 67/548/EEC

Disodium                                   611-025-00-7         217-710-3    1937-37-7
4-amino 3-[[4′-[(2,4-
diaminophenyl)azo][1,1′-biphenyl]-4-
yl]azo]-5-hydroxy-6-
(phenylazo)naphtalene-2,7-
disulphonate; C.I. Direct Black 38

Tetrasodium                                611-026-00-2         220-012-1    2602-46-2
3,3′-[[1,1′-biphenyl]-4,4′-
dylbis(azo)]bis[5-amino-4-
hydroxynaphthalene-2,7-
disulphonate]; C.I. Direct Blue 6

Disodium                                   611-027-00-8         209-358-4    573-58-0
3,3′-[[1,1′-bifenyl]-
4,4′dylbis(azo)]bis[4-
aminonaphthalene-1-sulphonate);
C.I. Direct Red 28
L 396/520        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

o-Dianisidine based azo dyes; 4,4'-        611-029-00-9         –            –
diarylazo-3,3'-dimethoxybiphenyl
dyes with the exception of those
mentioned elsewhere in Annex I to
Directive 67/548/EEC

o-Tolidine based dyes; 4,4'-diarylazo-     611-030-00-4         –            –
3,3'-dimethylbiphenyl dyes, with the
exception of those mentioned
elsewhere in Annex I to
Directive 67/548/EEC

1,4,5,8-Tetraaminoanthraquinone;           611-032-00-5         219-603-7    2475-45-8
C.I. Disperse Blue 1

6-hydroxy-1-(3-isopropoxypropyl)-4-        611-057-00-1         400-340-3    85136-74-9
methyl-2-oxo-5-[4-
(phenylazo)phenylazo]-1,2-dihydro-
3-pyridinecarbonitrile

(6-(4-hydroxy-3-(2-                        611-058-00-7         402-060-7    108225-03-2
methoxyphenylazo)-2-sulfonato-7-
naphthylamino)-1,3,5-triazin-2,4-
diyl)bis[(amino-1-methylethyl)-
ammonium] formate

Trisodium-[4'-(8-acetylamino-3,6-          611-063-00-4         413-590-3    164058-22-4
disulfonato-2-naphthylazo)-4''-(6-
benzoylamino-3-sulfonato-2-
naphthylazo)biphenyl-1,3',3'',1'''-
tetraolato-O, O', O'', O''']copper(II)

(Methylenebis(4,1-phenylenazo(1-(3-        611-099-00-0         401-500-5    —
(dimethylamino)propyl)-1,2-dihydro-
6-hydroxy-4-methyl-2-oxopyridine-
5,3-diyl)))-1,1'-dipyridinium
dichloride dihydrochloride
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/521


              Substances                    Index number         EC number     CAS number      Notes

Phenylhydrazine [1]                        612-023-00-9         202-873-5      100-63-0 [1]    E
                                                                [1]

Phenylhydrazinium chloride [2]                                  200-444-7      59-88-1 [2]
                                                                [2]

Phenylhydrazine hydrochloride [3]                               248-259-0      27140-08-5
                                                                [3]            [3]

Phenylhydrazinium sulphate (2:1) [4]                            257-622-2      52033-74-6
                                                                [4]            [4]

2-Methoxyaniline; o-anisidine              612-035-00-4         201-963-1      90-04-0         E

3,3′-Dimethoxybenzidine;                   612-036-00-X         204-355-4      119-90-4
o-dianisidine

Salts of 3,3′-dimethoxybenzidine;          612-037-00-5
salts of o-dianisidine

3,3′-Dimethylbenzidine; o-tolidine         612-041-00-7         204-358-0      119-93-7

4,4′-Diaminodiphenylmethane; 4,4′-         612-051-00-1         202-974-4      101-77-9        E
methylenedianiline

3,3′-Dichlorobenzidine; 3,3′-              612-068-00-4         202-109-0      91-94-1
dichlorobiphenyl-4,4′-ylenediamine

Salts of 3,3′-dichlorobenzidine; salts     612-069-00-X         210-323-0[1]   612-83-9[1]
of 3,3′-dichlorobiphenyl-4,4′-
ylenediamine                                                    265-293-1[2]   64969-34-2[2]

                                                                277-822-3[3]   74332-73-3[3]
L 396/522        EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


              Substances                     Index number         EC number     CAS number      Notes

N-nitrosodimethylamine;                     612-077-00-3         200-549-8      62-75-9         E
dimethylnitrosamine

2,2′-Dichloro-4,4′-                         612-078-00-9         202-918-9      101-14-4
methylenedianiline;

4,4′-Methylene bis(2-chloroaniline)

Salts of 2,2′-dichloro-4,4-                 612-079-00-4
methylenedianiline; salts of 4,4′-
methylenebis(2-chloroaniline)

Salts of 3,3′-dimethylbenzidine; salts      612-081-00-5         210-322-5[1]   612-82-8[1]
of o-tolidine
                                                                 265-294-7[2]   64969-36-4[2]

                                                                 277-985-0[3]   74753-18-7[3]

1-Methyl-3-nitro-1-nitrosoguanidine         612-083-00-6         200-730-1      70-25-7

4,4′-Methylenedi-o-toluidine                612-085-00-7         212-658-8      838-88-0

2,2′-(Nitrosoimino)bisethanol               612-090-00-4         214-237-4      1116-54-7

o-Toluidine                                 612-091-00-X         202-429-0      95-53-4

Nitrosodipropylamine                        612-098-00-8         210-698-0      621-64-7

4-Methyl-m-phenylenediamine                 612-099-00-3         202-453-1      95-80-7

Toluene-2,4-diammonium sulphate             612-126-00-9         265-697-8      65321-67-7

4-Chloraniline                              612-137-00-9         203-401-0      106-47-8

Diaminotoluene, technical product           612-151-00-5         246-910-3[1]   25376-45-8      E
- mixture of [2] and [3]                                                        [1]
                                                                 202-453-1
methyl-phenylenediamine [1]                                      [2]            95-80-7 [2]

4-methyl-m-phenylene diamine [2]                                 212-513-9      823-40-5 [3]
                                                                 [3]
2-methyl-m-phenylene diamine [3]
30.12.2006       EN                    Official Journal of the European Union                   L 396/523


              Substances                       Index number         EC number   CAS number      Notes

4-Chloro-o-toluidine [1]                      612-196-00-0         202-441-6    95-69-2 [1]     E
                                                                   [1]
4-chloro-o-toluidine hydrochloride                                              3165-93-3 [2]
[2]                                                                221-627-8
                                                                   [2]

2,4,5-Trimethylaniline [1]                    612-197-00-6         205-282-0    137-17-7 [1]    E
                                                                   [1]
2,4,5-trimethylaniline hydrochloride                                            21436-97-5
[2]                                                                - [2]        [2]

4,4'-Thiodianiline [1] and its salts          612-198-00-1         205-370-9    139-65-1 [1]    E
                                                                   [1]

4,4'-Oxydianiline [1] and its salts           612-199-00-7         202-977-0    101-80-4 [1]    E
                                                                   [1]
p-Aminophenyl ether [1]

2,4-Diaminoanisole [1]                        612-200-00-0         210-406-1    615-05-4 [1]
                                                                   [1]
4-methoxy-m-phenylenediamine                                                    39156-41-7
                                                                   254-323-9    [2]
2,4-diaminoanisole sulphate [2]                                    [2]

N,N,N',N'-tetramethyl-4,4'-                   612-201-00-6         202-959-2    101-61-1
methylendianiline

C.I. Basic Violet 3 with ≥ 0,1 % of           612-205-00-8         208-953-6    548-62-9        E
Michler's ketone (EC No 202-027-5)
L 396/524       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

6-Methoxy-m-toluidine                      612-209-00-X         204-419-1    120-71-8     E

p-cresidine

Ethyleneimine; aziridine                   613-001-00-1         205-793-9    151-56-4

2-Methylaziridine; propyleneimine          613-033-00-6         200-878-7    75-55-8      E

Captafol (ISO); 1,2,3,6-tetrahydro-N-      613-046-00-7         219-363-3    2425-06-1
(1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethylthio)
phthalimide

Carbadox (INN); methyl 3-                  613-050-00-9         229-879-0    6804-07-5
(quinoxalin-2-ylmethylene)carbazate
1,4-dioxide; 2-
(methoxycarbonylhydrazonomethyl)
quinoxaline 1,4-dioxide

A mixture of: 1,3,5-tris(3-                613-199-00-X         421-550-1    —
aminomethylphenyl)-1,3,5-
(1H,3H,5H)-triazine-2,4,6-trione;

a mixture of oligomers of 3,5-bis(3-
aminomethylphenyl)-1-poly[3,5-
bis(3-aminomethylphenyl)-2,4,6-
trioxo-1,3,5-(1H,3H,5H)-triazin-1-
yl]-1,3,5-(1H,3H,5H)-triazine-2,4,6-
trione
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/525


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Acrylamide                                  616-003-00-0        201-173-7    79-06-1

Thioacetamide                               616-026-00-6        200-541-4    62-55-5

A mixture of: N-[3-hydroxy-2-(2-            616-057-00-5        412-790-8    –
methylacryloylamino-
methoxy)propoxymethyl]-2-
methylacrylamide; N-[2,3-Bis-(2-
methylacryloylamino-
methoxy)propoxymethyl]-2-
methylacrylamide; methacrylamide;
2-methyl-N-(2-methyl-
acryloylaminomethoxymethyl)-
acrylamide; N-2,3-
dihydroxypropoxymethyl)-2-
methylacrylamide

Distillates (coal tar), benzole fraction;   648-001-00-0        283-482-7    84650-02-2
Light oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
distillation of coal tar. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
primarily in the range of C4 to C10 and
distilling in the approximate range of
80°C to 160°C.)

Tar oils, brown-coal; Light oil             648-002-00-6        302-674-4    94114-40-6   J

(The distillate from lignite tar boiling
in the range of approximately 80°C to
250°C. Composed primarily of
aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons
and monobasic phenols.)
L 396/526        EN                    Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                       Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Benzol forerunnings (coal); Light oil         648-003-00-1         266-023-5    65996-88-5    J
redistillate, low boiling

(The distillate from coke oven light
oil having an approximate distillation
range below 100°C. Composed
primarily of C4 to C6 aliphatic
hydrocarbons.)

Distillates (coal tar), benzole fraction,     648-004-00-7         309-984-9    101896-26-8   J
BTX-rich; Light oil redistillate, low
boiling

(A residue from the distillation of
crude benzole to remove benzole
fronts. Composed primarily of
benzene, toluene and xylenes boiling
in the range of approximately 75°C to
200°C.)

Aromatic hydrocarbons, C6-10,                 648-005-00-2         292-697-5    90989-41-6    J
C8-rich; Light oil redistillate, low
boiling

Solvent naphtha (coal), light; Light          648-006-00-8         287-498-5    85536-17-0    J
oil redistillate, low boiling

Solvent naphtha (coal),                       648-007-00-3         287-502-5    85536-20-5    J
xylene-styrene cut; Light oil
redistillate, intermediate boiling
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/527


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Solvent naphtha (coal),                    648-008-00-9        287-500-4    85536-19-2   J
coumarone-styrene contg.; Light oil
redistillate, intermediate boiling

Naphtha (coal), distillation residues;     648-009-00-4        292-636-2    90641-12-6   J
Light oil redistillate, high boiling

(The residue remaining from the
distillation of recovered naphtha.
Composed primarily of naphthalene
and condensation products of indene
and styrene.)

Aromatic hydrocarbons, C8; Light oil       648-010-00-X        292-694-9    90989-38-1   J
redistillate, high boiling

Aromatic hydrocarbons, C8-9,               648-012-00-0        295-281-1    91995-20-9   J
hydrocarbon resin polymerisation
by-product; Light oil redistillate, high
boiling

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
evaporation of solvent under vacuum
from polymerised hydrocarbon resin.
It consists predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C8
through C9 and boiling in the range of
approximately 120°C to 215°C.)

Aromatic hydrocarbons, C9-12,              648-013-00-6        295-551-9    92062-36-7   J
benzene distillation; Light oil
redistillate, high boiling
L 396/528        EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                      Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Extract residues (coal), benzole             648-014-00-1         295-323-9    91995-61-8    J
fraction alk., acid ext.; Light oil
extract residues, low boiling

(The redistillate from the distillate,
freed of tar acids and tar bases, from
bituminous coal high temperature tar
boiling in the approximate range of
90°C to 160°C. It consists
predominantly of benzene, toluene
and xylenes.)

Extract residues (coal tar), benzole         648-015-00-7         309-868-8    101316-63-6   J
fraction alk., acd ext.; Light oil
extract residues, low boiling

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
redistillation of the distillate of high
temperature coal tar (tar acid and tar
base free). It consists predominantly
of unsubstituted and substituted
mononuclear aromatic hydrocarbons
boiling in the range of 85°C–195°C.)

Extract residues (coal), benzole             648-016-00-2         298-725-2    93821-38-6    J
fraction acid; Light oil extract
residues, low boiling

(An acid sludge by-product of the
sulphuric acid refining of crude high
temperature coal. Composed
primarily of sulfuric acid and organic
compounds.)
30.12.2006       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/529


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Extract residues (coal), light oil alk.,    648-017-00-8         292-625-2    90641-02-4    J
distillation overheads; Light oil
extract residues, low boiling

(The first fraction from the distillation
of aromatic hydrocarbons,
coumarone, naphthalene and indene
rich prefactionator bottoms or washed
carbolic oil boiling substantially
below 145°C. Composed primarily of
C7 and C8 aliphatic and aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Extract residues (coal), light oil alk.,    648-018-00-3         309-867-2    101316-62-5   J
acid ext., indene fraction; Light oil
extract residues, intermediate boiling

Extract residues (coal), light oil alk.,    648-019-00-9         292-626-8    90641-03-5    J
indene naphtha fraction; Light oil
extract residues, high boiling

(The distillate from aromatic
hydrocarbons, coumarone,
naphthalene and indene rich
prefractionator bottoms or washed
carbolic oils, having an approximate
boiling range of 155°C to 180°C.
Composed primarily of indene, indan
and trimethylbenzenes.)
L 396/530         EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


               Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Solvent naphtha (coal); Light oil             648-020-00-4        266-013-0    65996-79-4    J
extract residues, high boiling

(The distillate from either high
temperature coal tar, coke oven light
oil, or coal tar oil alkaline extract
residue having an approximate
distillation range of 130°C to 210°C.
Composed primarily of indene and
other polycyclic ring systems
containing a single aromatic ring.
May contain phenolic compounds and
aromatic nitrogen bases.)

Distillates (coal tar), light oils, neutral   648-021-00-X        309-971-8    101794-90-5   J
fraction; Light oil extract residues,
high boiling

(A distillate from the fractional
distillation of high temperature coal
tar. Composed primarily of
alkyl-substituted one ring aromatic
hydrocarbons boiling in the range of
approximately 135°C to 210°C. May
also include unsaturated
hydrocarbons such as indene and
coumarone.)

Distillates (coal tar), light oils, acid      648-022-00-5        292-609-5    90640-87-2    J
exts.; Light oil extract residues, high
boiling

(This oil is a complex mixture of
aromatic hydrocarbons, primarily
indene, naphthalene, coumarone,
phenol and o-, m- and p-cresol and
boiling in the range of 140°C to
215°C.)
30.12.2006        EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/531


               Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (coal tar), light oils;          648-023-00-0         283-483-2    84650-03-3   J
Carbolic oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
of coal tar. It consists of aromatic and
other hydrocarbons, phenolic
compounds and aromatic nitrogen
compounds and distills at the
approximate range of 150°C to
210°C.)

Tar oils, coal; Carbolic oil                 648-024-00-6         266-016-7    65996-82-9   J

(The distillate from high temperature
coal tar having an approximate
distillation range of 130°C to 250°C.
Composed primarily of naphthalene,
alkylnaphthalenes, phenolic
compounds, and aromatic nitrogen
bases.)

Extract residues (coal), light oil alk.,     648-026-00-7         292-624-7    90641-01-3   J
acid ext.; Carbolic oil extract residue

(The oil resulting from the acid
washing of alkali-washed carbolic oil
to remove the minor amounts of basic
compounds (tar bases). Composed
primarily of indene, indan and
alkylbenzenes.)
L 396/532        EN                    Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                       Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Extract residues (coal), tar oil alk.;        648-027-00-2         266-021-4    65996-87-4   J
Carbolic oil extract residue

(The residue obtained from coal tar
oil by an alkaline wash such as
aqueous sodium hydroxide after the
removal of crude coal tar acids.
Composed primarily of naphthalenes
and aromatic nitrogen bases.)

Extract oils (coal), light oil; Acid          648-028-00-8         292-622-6    90640-99-6   J
Extract

(The aqueous extract produced by an
acidic wash of alkali-washed carbolic
oil. Composed primarily of acid salts
of various aromatic nitrogen bases
including pyridine, quinoline and
their alkyl derivatives.)

Pyridine, alkyl derivs.; Crude tar            648-029-00-3         269-929-9    68391-11-7   J
bases

(The complex combination of
polyalkylated pyridines derived from
coal tar distillation or as high-boiling
distillates approximately above 150°C
from the reaction of ammonia with
acetaldehyde, formaldehyde or
paraformaldehyde.)
30.12.2006       EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/533


              Substances                      Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Tar bases, coal, picoline fraction;          648-030-00-9         295-548-2    92062-33-4   J
Distillate bases

(Pyridine bases boiling in the range of
approximately 125°C to 160°C
obtained by distillation of neutralised
acid extract of the base-containing tar
fraction obtained by the distillation of
bituminous coal tars. Composed
chiefly of lutidines and picolines.)

Tar bases, coal, lutidine fraction;          648-031-00-4         293-766-2    91082-52-9   J
Distillate bases

Extract oils (coal), tar base, collidine     648-032-00-X         273-077-3    68937-63-3   J
fraction; Distillate bases

(The extract produced by the acid
extraction of bases from crude coal
tar aromatic oils, neutralisation, and
distillation of the bases. Composed
primarily of collidines, aniline,
toluidines, lutidines, xylidines.)

Tar bases, coal, collidine fraction;         648-033-00-5         295-543-5    92062-28-7   J
Distillate bases

(The destillation fraction boiling in
the range of approximately 181°C to
186°C from the crude bases obtained
from the neutralised, acid-extracted
base-containing tar fractions obtained
by the distillation of bituminous coal
tar. It contains chiefly aniline and
collidines.)
L 396/534        EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Tar Bases, coal, aniline fraction;          648-034-00-0         295-541-4    92062-27-6   J
Distillate bases

(The distillation fraction boiling in
the range of approximately 180°C to
200°C from the crude bases obtained
by dephenolating and debasing the
carbolated oil from the distillation of
coal tar. It contains chiefly aniline,
collidines, lutidines and toluidines.)

Tar bases, coal, toluidine fraction;        648-035-00-6         293-767-8    91082-53-0   J
Distillate bases

Distillates (petroleum),                    648-036-00-1         295-292-1    91995-31-2   J
alkene-alkyene manuf. pyrolysis oil,
mixed with high-temp. coal tar,
indene fraction; Redistillates

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a
redistillate from the fractional
distillation of bituminous coal high
temperature tar and residual oils that
are obtained by the pyrolytic
production of alkenes and alkynes
from petroleum products or natural
gas. It consists predominantly of
indene and boils in a range of
approximately 160°C to 190°C.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/535


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Distillates (coal), coal tar-residual      648-037-00-7         295-295-8    91995-35-6    J
pyrolysis oils, naphthalene oils;
Redistillates

(The redistillate obtained from the
fractional distillation of bituminous
coal high temperature tar and
pyrolysis residual oils and boiling in
the range of approximately 190°C to
270°C. Composed primarily of
substituted dinuclear aromatics.)

Extract oils (coal), coal tar-residual     648-038-00-2         295-329-1    91995-66-3    J
pyrolysis oils, naphthalene oil,
redistillate; Redistillates

(The redistillate from the fractional
distillation of dephenolated and
debased methylnaphthalene oil
obtained from bituminous coal high
temperature tar and pyrolysis residual
oils boiling in the approximate range
of 220°C to 230°C. It consists
predominantly of unsubstituted and
substituted dinuclear aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Extract oils (coal), coal tar-residual     648-039-00-8         310-170-0    122070-79-5   J
pyrolysis oils, naphthalene oils;
Redistillates

(A neutral oil obtained by debasing
and dephenolating the oil obtained
from the distillation of high
temperature tar and pyrolysis residual
oils which has a boiling range of
225°C to 255°C. Composed primarily
of substituted dinuclear aromatic
hydrocarbons.)
L 396/536        EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Extract oils (coal), coal tar residual       648-040-00-3        310-171-6    122070-80-8   J
pyrolysis oils, naphthalene oil,
distillation residues; Redistillates

(Residue from the distillation of
dephenolated and debased
methylnaphthalene oil (from
bituminous coal tar and pyrolysis
residual oils) with a boiling range of
240°C to 260°C. Composed primarily
of substituted dinuclear aromatic and
heterocyclic hydrocarbons.)

Absorption oils, bicyclo arom. and           648-041-00-9        309-851-5    101316-45-4   M
heterocyclic hydrocarbon fraction;
Wash oil redistillate

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a
redistillate from the distillation of
wash oil. It consists predominantly of
2-ringed aromatic and heterocyclic
hydrocarbons boiling in the range of
approximately 260°C to 290°C.)

Distillates (coal tar), upper,               648-042-00-4        284-900-0    84989-11-7    M
fluorene-rich; Wash oil redistillate

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
crystallisation of tar oil. It consists of
aromatic and polycyclic hydrocarbons
primarily fluorene and some
acenaphthene.)
30.12.2006       EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/537


              Substances                      Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Creosote oil, acenaphthene fraction,         648-043-00-X         292-606-9    90640-85-0   H
acenaphthene-free; Wash oil
redistillate

(The oil remaining after removal by a
crystallisation process of
acenaphthene from acenaphthene oil
from coal tar. Composed primarily of
naphthalene and alkylnaphthalenes.)

Distillates (coal tar), heavy oils;          648-044-00-5         292-607-4    90640-86-1
Heavy anthracene oil

(Distillate from the fractional
distillation of coal tar of bituminous
coal, with boiling range of 240°C to
400°C. Composed primarily of tri-
and polynuclear hydrocarbons and
heterocyclic compounds.)

Anthracene oil, acid ext.; Anthracene        648-046-00-6         295-274-3    91995-14-1   M
oil extract residue

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the base-freed
fraction obtained from the distillation
of coal tar and boiling in the range of
approximately 325°C to 365°C. It
contains predominantly anthracene
and phenanthrene and their alkyl
derivatives.)
L 396/538        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Distillates (coal tar); Heavy              648-047-00-1         266-027-7    65996-92-1    M
anthracene oil

(The distillate from coal tar having an
approximate distillation range of
100°C to 450°C. Composed primarily
of two to four membered condensed
ring aromatic hydrocarbons, phenolic
compounds, and aromatic nitrogen
bases.)

Distillates (coal tar), pitch, heavy oils; 648-048-00-7         295-312-9    91995-51-6    M
Heavy anthracene oil

(The distillate from the distillation of
the pitch obtained from bituminous
high temperature tar. Composed
primarily of tri- and polynuclear
aromatic hydrocarbons and boiling in
the range of approximately 300°C to
470°C. The product may also contain
heteroatoms.)

Distillates (coal tar), pitch; Heavy       648-049-00-2         309-855-7    101316-49-8   M
anthracene oil

(The oil obtained from condensation
of the vapours from the heat treatment
of pitch. Composed primarily of
two-to four-ring aromatic compounds
boiling in the range of 200°C to
greater than 400°C.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/539


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (coal tar), heavy oils,        648-050-00-8         295-304-5    91995-42-5   M
pyrene fraction; Heavy anthracene oil
redistillate

(The redistillate obtained from the
fractional distillation of pitch
distillate boiling in the range of
approximately 350°C to 400°C.
Consists predominantly of tri- and
polynuclear aromatic and heterocyclic
hydrocarbons.)

Distillates (coal tar), pitch, pyrene      648-051-00-3         295-313-4    91995-52-7   M
fraction; Heavy anthracene oil
redistillate

(The redistillate obtained from the
fractional distillation of pitch
distillate and boiling in the range of
approximately 380°C to 410°C.
Composed primarily of tri- and
polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons
and heterocyclic compounds.)

Paraffin waxes (coal), brown-coal          648-052-00-9         308-296-6    97926-76-6   M
high-temp. tar, carbon-treated; Coal
tar extract

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of lignite carbonisation tar
with activated carbon for removal of
trace constituents and impurities. It
consists predominantly of saturated
straight and branched chain
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C12.)
L 396/540        EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


               Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Paraffin waxes (coal), brown-coal           648-053-00-4         308-297-1    97926-77-7    M
high-temp. tar, carbon-treated; Coal
tar extract

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of lignite carbonisation tar
with bentonite for removal of trace
constituents and impurities. It consists
predominantly of saturated straight
and branched chain hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C12.)

Pitch; Pitch                                648-054-00-X         263-072-4    61789-60-4    M

Pitch, coal tar, high temp.; Pitch          648-055-00-5         266-028-2    65996-93-2

(The residue from the distillation of
high temperature coal tar. A black
solid with an approximate softening
point from 30°C to 180°C. Composed
primarily of a complex mixture of
three or more membered condensed
ring aromatic hydrocarbons.)

Pitch, coal tar, high temp.,                648-056-00-0         310-162-7    121575-60-8   M
heat-treated; Pitch

(The heat treated residue from the
distillation of high temperature coal
tar. A black solid with an
approximate softening point from
80°C to 180°C. Composed primarily
of a complex mixture of three or more
membered condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/541


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Pitch, coal tar, high temp., secondary;    648-057-00-6         302-650-3    94114-13-3   M
Pitch redistillate

(The residue obtained during the
distillation of high boiling fractions
from bituminous coal high
temperature tar and/or pitch coke oil,
with a softening point of 140°C to
170°C according to DIN 52025.
Composed primarily of tri- and
polynuclear aromatic compounds
which also contain heteroatoms.)

Residues (coal tar), pitch distillation;   648-058-00-1         295-507-9    92061-94-4   M
Pitch redistillate

(Residue from the fractional
distillation of pitch distillate boiling
in the range of approximately 400°C
to 470°C. Composed primarily of
polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons,
and heterocyclic compounds.)

Tar, coal, high-temp., distillation and    648-059-00-7         295-535-1    92062-20-9   M
storage residues; Coal tar solids
residue

(Coke- and ash-containing solid
residues that separate on distillation
and thermal treatment of bituminous
coal high temperature tar in
distillation installations and storage
vessels. Consists predominantly of
carbon and contains a small quantity
of hetero compounds as well as ash
components.)
L 396/542        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Tar, coal, storage residues; Coal tar     648-060-00-2         293-764-1    91082-50-7    M
solids residue

(The deposit removed from crude
coal tar storages. Composed primarily
of coal tar and carbonaceous
particulate matter.)

Tar, coal, high-temp., residues; Coal     648-061-00-8         309-726-5    100684-51-3   M
tar solids residue

(Solids formed during the coking of
bituminous coal to produce crude
bituminous coal high temperature tar.
Composed primarily of coke and coal
particles, highly aromatised
compounds and mineral substances.)

Tar, coal, high-temp., high-solids;       648-062-00-3         273-615-7    68990-61-4    M
Coal tar solids residue

(The condensation product obtained
by cooling, to approximately ambient
temperature, the gas evolved in the
high temperature (greater than 700°C)
destructive distillation of coal.
Composed primarily of a complex
mixture of condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons with a high solid
content of coal-type materials.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/543


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Waste solids, coal-tar pitch coking;     648-063-00-9         295-549-8    92062-34-5   M
Coal tar solids residue

(The combination of wastes formed
by the coking of bituminous coal tar
pitch. It consists predominantly of
carbon.)

Extract residues (coal), brown; Coal     648-064-00-4         294-285-0    91697-23-3   M
tar extract

(The residue from extraction of dried
coal.)

Paraffin waxes (coal), brown-coal-       648-065-00-X         295-454-1    92045-71-1   M
high-temp. tar; Coal tar extract

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from lignite
carbonisation tar by solvent
crystallisation (solvent deoiling), by
sweating or an adducting process. It
consists predominantly of straight and
branched chain saturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C12.)
L 396/544        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Paraffin waxes (coal), brown-coal-         648-066-00-5        295-455-7    92045-72-2   M
high-temp. tar, hydrotreated; Coal tar
extract

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from lignite
carbonisation tar by solvent
crystallisation (solvent deoiling), by
sweating or an adducting process
treated with hydrogen in the presence
of a catalyst. It consists
predominantly of straight and
branched chain saturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C12.)

Paraffin waxes (coal), brown-coal          648-067-00-0        308-298-7    97926-78-8   M
high-temp tar, silicic acid-treated;
Coal tar extract

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of lignite carbonisation tar
with silicic acid for removal of trace
constituents and impurities. It consists
predominantly of saturated straight
and branched chain hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C12.)
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/545


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Tar, coal, low-temp., distillation        648-068-00-6         309-887-1    101316-85-2   M
residues; Tar oil, intermediate boiling

(Residues from fractional distillation
of low temperature coal tar to remove
oils that boil in a range up to
approximately 300°C. Composed
primarily of aromatic compounds.)

Pitch, coal tar, low-temp; Pitch          648-069-00-1         292-651-4    90669-57-1    M
residue

(A complex black solid or semi-solid
obtained from the distillation of a low
temperature coal tar. It has a
softening point within the
approximate range of 40°C to 180°C.
Composed primarily of a complex
mixture of hydrocarbons.)

Pitch, coal tar, low-temp., oxidised;     648-070-00-7         292-654-0    90669-59-3    M
Pitch residue, oxidised

(The product obtained by air-blowing,
at elevated temperature,
low-temperature coal tar pitch. It has
a softening-point within the
approximate range of 70°C to 180°C.
Composed primarily of a complex
mixture of hydrocarbons.)
L 396/546        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Pitch, coal tar, low-temp.,                648-071-00-2         292-653-5    90669-58-2    M
heat-treated; Pitch residue, oxidised;
Pitch residue, heat-treated

(A complex black solid obtained by
the heat treatment of low temperature
coal tar pitch. It has a softening point
within the approximate range of 50°C
to 140°C. Composed primarily of a
complex mixture of aromatic
compounds.)

Distillates (coal-petroleum),              648-072-00-8         269-159-3    68188-48-7    M
condensed ring arom.; Distillates

(The distillate from a mixture of coal
and tar and aromatic petroleum
streams having an approximate
distillation range of 220°C to 450°C.
Composed primarily of 3- to
4-membered condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Aromatic hydrocarbons, C20-28,             648-073-00-3         309-956-6    101794-74-5   M
polycyclic, mixed coal-tar
pitch-polyethylene-polypropylene
pyrolysis-derived; Pyrolysis products

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from mixed
coal tar pitch-polyethylene-
polypropylene pyrolysis. Composed
primarily of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C28 and having a softening
point of 100°C to 220°C according to
DIN 52025.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/547


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Aromatic hydrocarbons, C20-28,           648-074-00-9         309-957-1    101794-75-6   M
polycyclic, mixed coal-tar
pitch-polyethylene pyrolysis-derived;
Pyrolysis products

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from mixed
coal tar pitch-polyethylene pyrolysis.
Composed primarily of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C20 through C28 and having a
softening point of 100°C to 220°C
according to DIN 52025.)

Aromatic hydrocarbons, C20-28,           648-075-00-4         309-958-7    101794-76-7   M
polycyclic, mixed coal-tar
pitch-polystyrene pyrolysis-derived;
Pyrolysis products

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from mixed
coal tar pitch-polystyrene pyrolysis.
Composed primarily of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C20 through C28 and having a
softening point of 100°C to 220°C
according to DIN 52025.)
L 396/548         EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


               Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Pitch, coal tar-petroleum; Pitch             648-076-00-X         269-109-0    68187-57-5    M
residues

(The residue from the distillation of a
mixture of coal tar and aromatic
petroleum streams. A solid with a
softening point from 40°C to 180°C.
Composed primarily of a complex
combination of three or more
membered condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Phenanthrene, distillation residues;         648-077-00-5         310-169-5    122070-78-4   M
Heavy anthracene oil redistillate

(Residue from the distillation of crude
phenanthrene boiling in the
approximate range of 340°C to
420°C. It consists predominantly of
phenanthrene, anthracene and
carbazole.)

Distillates (coal tar), upper,               648-078-00-0         284-899-7    84989-10-6    M
fluorene-free; Wash oil redistillate

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
crystallisation of tar oil. It consists of
aromatic polycyclic hydrocarbons,
primarily diphenyl, dibenzofuran and
acenaphthene.)
30.12.2006       EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/549


               Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Residues (coal tar), creosote oil            648-080-00-1         295-506-3    92061-93-3   H
distillation; Wash oil redistillate

(The residue from the fractional
distillation of wash oil boiling in the
approximate range of 270°C to
330°C. It consists predominantly of
dinuclear aromatic and heterocyclic
hydrocarbons.)

Distillates (coal), coke-oven light oil,     648-084-00-3         285-076-5    85029-51-2   J, M
naphthalene cut; Naphthalene oil

(The complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
prefractionation (continuous
distillation) of coke oven light oil. It
consists predominantly of
naphthalene, coumarone and indene
and boils above 148°C.)

Distillates (coal tar), naphthalene oils,    648-086-00-4         284-898-1    84989-09-3   J, M
naphthalene-low; Napththalene oil
redistillate

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
crystallisation of naphthalene oil.
Composed primarily of naphthalene,
alkyl naphthalenes and phenolic
compounds.)
L 396/550       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Distillates (coal tar), naphthalene oil 648-087-00-X          295-310-8    91995-49-2    J, M
crystn. mother liquor; Naphthalene oil
redistillate

(A complex combination of organic
compounds obtained as a filtrate from
the crystallisation of the naphthalene
fraction from coal tar and boiling in
the range of approximately 200°C to
230°C. Contains chiefly naphthalene,
thionaphthene and
alkylnaphthalenes.)

Extract residues (coal), naphthalene      648-088-00-5        310-166-9    121620-47-1   J, M
oil, alk.; Naphthalene oil extract
residue

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the alkali
washing of naphthalene oil to remove
phenolic compounds (tar acids). It is
composed of naphthalene and alkyl
naphthalenes.)

Extract residues (coal), naphthalene      648-089-00-0        310-167-4    121620-48-2   J, M
oil, alk., naphthalene-low;
Naphthalene oil extract residue

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons remaining after the
removal of naphthalene from
alkali-washed naphthalene oil by a
crystallisation process. It is composed
primarily of naphthalene and alkyl
naphthalenes.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/551


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Distillates (coal tar), naphthalene oils,   648-090-00-6        292-612-1    90640-90-7    J, M
naphthalene-free, alk. exts.;
Naphthalene oil extract residue

(The oil remaining after the removal
of phenolic compounds (tar acids)
from drained naphthalene oil by an
alkali wash. Composed primarily of
naphthalene and alkyl naphthalenes.)

Extract residues (coal), naphthalene        648-091-00-1        292-627-3    90641-04-6    J, M
oil alk., distillation overheads;
Naphthalene oil extract residue

(The distillation from alkali-washed
naphthalene oil having an
approximate distillation range of
180°C to 220°C. Composed primarily
of naphthalene, alkylbenzenes, indene
and indan.)

Distillates (coal tar), naphthalene oils,   648-092-00-7        309-985-4    101896-27-9   J, M
methylnaphthalene fraction;
Methylnaphthalene oil

(A distillate from the fractional
distillation of high temperature coal
tar. Composed primarily of
substituted two ring aromatic
hydrocarbons and aromatic nitrogen
bases boiling in the range of
approximately 225°C to 255°C.)
L 396/552        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Distillates (coal tar), naphthalene oils,   648-093-00-2        309-972-3    101794-91-6   J, M
indole-methylnaphthalene fraction;
Methylnaphthalene oil

(A distillate from the fractional
distillation of high temperature coal
tar. Composed primarily of indole and
methylnaphthalene boiling in the
range of approximately 235°C to
255°C.)

Distillates (coal tar), naphthalene oils,   648-094-00-8        295-309-2    91995-48-1    J, M
acid exts.; Methylnaphtalene oil
extract residue

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by debasing
the methylnaphthalene fraction
obtained by the distillation of coal tar
and boiling in the range of
approximately 230°C to 255°C.
Contains chiefly
1(2)-methylnaphthalene, naphthalene,
dimethylnaphthalene and biphenyl.)

Extract residues (coal), naphthalene        648-095-00-3        292-628-9    90641-05-7    J, M
oil alk., distillation residues;
Methylnaphthalene oil extract residue

(The residue from the distillation of
alkali-washed naphthalene oil having
an approximate distillation range of
220°C to 300°C. Composed primarily
of naphthalene, alkylnaphthalenes and
aromatic nitrogen bases.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/553


               Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Extract oils (coal), acidic, tar-base       648-096-00-9        284-901-6    84989-12-8    J, M
free; Methylnaphthalene oil extract
residue

(The extract oil boiling in the range of
approximately 220°C to 265°C from
coal tar alkaline extract residue
produced by an acidic wash such as
aqueous sulfuric acid after distillation
to remove tar bases. Composed
primarily of alkylnaphthalenes.)

Distillates (coal tar), benzole fraction,   648-097-00-4        310-165-3    121620-46-0   J, M
distillation residues; Wash oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
distillation of crude benzole (high
temperature coal tar). It may be a
liquid with the approximate
distillation range of 150°C to 300°C
or a semi-solid or solid with a melting
point up to 70°C. It is composed
primarily of naphthalene and alkyl
naphthalenes.)

Creosote oil, acenaphthene fraction         648-098-00-X        292-605-3    90640-84-9    H

Wash oil


Creosote oil                                648-099-00-5        263-047-8    61789-28-4    H
L 396/554        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Creosote oil, high-boiling distillate;     648-100-00-9         274-565-9    70321-79-8    H
Wash oil

(The high-boiling distillation fraction
obtained from the high temperature
carbonisation of bituminous coal
which is further refined to remove
excess crystalline salts. It consists
primarily of creosote oil with some of
the normal polynuclear aromatic salts,
which are components of coal tar
distillates, removed. It is crystal free
at approximately 5°C.)

Creosote                                   648-101-00-4         232-287-5    8001-58-9     H




Extract residues (coal), creosote oil      648-102-00-X         310-189-4    122384-77-4   H
acid; Wash oil extract residue

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the base-freed
fraction from the distillation of coal
tar, boiling in the range of
approximately 250°C to 280°C. It
consists predominantly of biphenyl
and isomeric diphenylnaphthalenes.)

Anthracene oil, anthracene paste;          648-103-00-5         292-603-2    90640-81-6    J, M
Anthracene oil fraction

(The anthracene-rich solid obtained
by the crystallisation and centrifuging
of anthracene oil. It is composed
primarily of anthracene, carbazole
and phenanthrene.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/555


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Anthracene oil, anthracene-low;           648-104-00-0         292-604-8    90640-82-7   J, M
Anthracene oil fraction

(The oil remaining after the removal,
by a crystallisation process, of an
anthracene-rich solid (anthracene
paste) from anthracene oil. It is
composed primarily of two, three and
four membered aromatic compounds.)

Residues (coal tar), anthracene oil       648-105-00-6         295-505-8    92061-92-2   J, M
distillation; Anthracene oil fraction

(The residue from the fraction
distillation of crude anthracene
boiling in the approximate range of
340°C to 400°C. It consists
predominantly of tri- and polynuclear
aromatic and heterocyclic
hydrocarbons.)

Anthracene oil, anthracene paste,         648-106-00-1         295-275-9    91995-15-2   J, M
anthracene fraction; Anthracene oil
fraction

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
anthracene obtained by the
crystallisation of anthracene oil from
bituminous high temperature tar and
boiling in the range of 330°C to
350°C. It contains chiefly anthracene,
carbazole and phenanthrene.)
L 396/556        EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                      Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Anthracene oil, anthracene paste,            648-107-00-7         295-276-4    91995-16-3   J, M
carbazole fraction; Anthracene oil
fraction

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
anthracene obtained by crystallisation
of anthrancene oil from bituminous
coal high temperature tar and boiling
in the approximate range of 350°C to
360°C. It contains chiefly anthracene,
carbazole and phenanthrene.)

Anthracene oil, anthracene paste,            648-108-00-2         295-278-5    91995-17-4   J, M
distillation lights; Anthracene oil
fraction

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
anthracene obtained by crystallisation
of anthracene oil from bituminous
light temperature tar and boiling in
the range of approximately 290°C to
340°C. It contains chiefly trinuclear
aromatics and their dihydro
derivatives.)
30.12.2006        EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/557


               Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Tar oils, coal, low-temp.; Tar oil, high 648-109-00-8             309-889-2    101316-87-4   J, M
boiling

(A distillate from low-temperature
coal tar. Composed primarily of
hydrocarbons, phenolic compounds
and aromatic nitrogen bases boiling in
the range of approximately 160°C to
340°C.)

Phenols, ammonia liquor ext.;                648-111-00-9         284-881-9    84988-93-2    J, M
Alkaline extract

(The combination of phenols
extracted, using isobutyl acetate, from
the ammonia liquor condensed from
the gas evolved in low-temperature
(less than 700°C) destructive
distillation of coal. It consists
predominantly of a mixture of
monohydric and dihydric phenols.)

Distillates (coal tar), light oils,          648-112-00-4         292-610-0    90640-88-3    J, M
alk. exts.; Alkaline extract

(The aqueous extract from carbolic
oil produced by an alkaline wash such
as aqueous sodium hydroxide.
Composed primarily of the alkali salts
of various phenolic compounds.)
L 396/558        EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Extracts, coal tar oil alk.; Alkaline       648-113-00-X         266-017-2    65996-83-0   J, M
extract

(The extract from coal tar oil
produced by an alkaline wash such as
aqueous sodium hydroxide.
Composed primarily of the alkali salts
of various phenolic compounds.)

Distillates (coal tar), naphthalene oils,   648-114-00-5         292-611-6    90640-89-4   J, M
alk. exts.; Alkaline extract

(The aqueous extract from
naphthalene oil produced by an
alkaline wash such as aqueous
sodium hydroxid. Composed
primarily of the alkali salts of various
phenolic compounds.)

Extract residues (coal), tar oil alk.,      648-115-00-0         292-629-4    90641-06-8   J, M
carbonated, limed; Crude phenols

(The product obtained by treatment of
coal tar oil alkaline extract with CO2
and CaO. Composed primarily of
CaCO3, Ca(OH)2, Na2CO3 and other
organic and inorganic impurities.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/559


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Tar acids, brown-coal, crude; Crude        648-117-00-1         309-888-7    101316-86-3   J, M
phenols

(An acidified alkaline extract of
brown coal tar distillate. Composed
primarily of phenol and phenol
homologs.)

Tar acids, brown-coal gasification;        648-118-00-7         295-536-7    92062-22-1    J, M
Crude phenols

(A complex combination of organic
compounds obtained from brown coal
gasification. Composed primarily of
C6-10 hydroxy aromatic phenols and
their homologs.)

Tar acids, distillation residues;          648-119-00-2         306-251-5    96690-55-0    J, M
Distillate phenols

(A residue from the distillation of
crude phenol from coal. It consists
predominantly of phenols having
carbon numbers in the range of C8
through C10 with a softening point of
60°C to 80°C.)

Tar acids, methylphenol fraction;          648-120-00-8         284-892-9    84989-04-8    J, M
Distillate phenols

(The fraction of tar acid rich in 3- and
4-methylphenol, recovered by
distillation of low-temperature coal
tar crude tar acids.)
L 396/560        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Tar acids, polyalkylphenol fraction;       648-121-00-3         284-893-4    84989-05-9   J, M
Distillate phenols

(The fraction of tar acids, recovered
by distillation of low-temperature
coal tar crude tar acids, having an
approximate boiling range of 225°C
to 320°C. Composed primarily of
polyalkylphenols.)

Tar acids, xylenol fraction; Distillate    648-122-00-9         284-895-5    84989-06-0   J, M
phenols

(The fraction of tar acids, rich in 2,4-
and 2,5-dimethylphenol, recovered by
distillation of low-temperature coal
tar crude tar acids.)

Tar acids, ethylphenol fraction;           648-123-00-4         284-891-3    84989-03-7   J, M
Distillate phenols

(The fraction of tar acids, rich in 3-
and 4-ethylphenol, recovered by
distillation of low-temperature coal
tar crude tar acids.)
30.12.2006       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/561


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Tar acids, 3,5-xylenol fraction;            648-124-00-X         284-896-0    84989-07-1   J, M
Distillate phenols

(The fraction of tar acids, rich in
3,5-dimethylphenol, recovered by
distillation of low-temperature coal
tar acids.)

Tar acids, residues, distillates,           648-125-00-5         270-713-1    68477-23-6   J, M
first-cut; Distillate phenols

(The residue from the distillation in
the range of 235°C to 355°C of light
carbolic oil.)

Tar acids, cresylic, residues; Distillate 648-126-00-0           271-418-0    68555-24-8   J, M
phenols

(The residue from crude coal tar acids
after removal of phenol, cresols,
xylenols and any higher boiling
phenols. A black solid with a melting
point approximately 80°C. Composed
primarily of polyalkyphenols, resin
gums, and inorganic salts.)

Phenols, C9-11; Distillate phenols          648-127-00-6         293-435-2    91079-47-9   J, M
L 396/562        EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Tar acids, cresylic; Distillate phenols     648-128-00-1         295-540-9    92062-26-5   J, M

(A complex combination of organic
compounds obtained from brown coal
and boiling in the range of
approximately 200°C to 230°C. It
contains chiefly phenols and pyridine
bases.)

Tar acids, brown-coal, C2-alkylphenol 648-129-00-7               302-662-9    94114-29-1   J, M
fraction; Distillate phenols

(The distillate from the acidification
of alkaline washed lignite tar distillate
boiling in the range of approximately
200°C to 230°C. Composed primarily
of m- and p-ethylphenol as well as
cresols and xylenols.)

Extract oils (coal), naphthalene oils;      648-130-00-2         292-623-1    90641-00-2   J, M
Acid extract

(The aqueous extract produced by an
acidic wash of alkali-washed
naphthalene oil. Composed primarily
of acid salts of various aromatic
nitrogen bases including pyridine,
quinoline and their alkyl derivatives.)

Tar bases, quinoline derivs.; Distillate    648-131-00-8         271-020-7    68513-87-1   J, M
bases

Tar bases, coal, quinoline derivs.          648-132-00-3         274-560-1    70321-67-4   J, M
fraction; Distillate bases
30.12.2006       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/563


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Tar bases, coal, distillation residues;      648- 133 -00-9 274-544-0         92062-29-8    J, M
Distillate bases

(The distillation residue remaining
after the distillation of the neutralised,
acid-extracted base-containing tar
fractions obtained by the distillation
of coal tars. It contains chiefly
aniline, collidines, quinoline and
quinoline derivatives and toluidines.)

Hydrocarbon oils, arom., mixed with          648-134-00-4        309-745-9    100801-63-6   J, M
polyethylene and polypropylene,
pyrolysed, light oil fraction; Heat
treatment products

(The oil obtained from the heat
treatment of a
polyethylene/polypropylene mixture
with coal tar pitch or aromatic oils. It
consists predominantly of benzene
and its homologs boiling in a range of
approximately 70°C to 120°C.)

Hydrocarbon oils, arom., mixed with          648-135-00-X        309-748-5    100801-65-8   J, M
polyethylene, pyrolysed, light oil
fraction; Heat treatment products

(The oil obtained from the heat
treatment of polyethylene with coal
tar pitch or aromatic oils. It consists
predominantly of benzene and its
homologs boiling in a range of 70°C
to 120°C.)
L 396/564        EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Hydrocarbon oils, arom., mixed with          648-136-00-5        309-749-0    100801-66-9   J, M
polystyrene, pyrolysed, light oil
fraction; Heat treatment products

(The oil obtained from the heat
treatment of polystyrene with coal tar
pitch or aromatic oils. It consists
predominantly of benzene and its
homologs boiling in a range of
approximately 70°C to 210°C.)

Extract residues (coal), tar oil alk.,       648-137-00-0        277-567-8    736665-18-6   J, M
naphthalene distillation residues;
Naphthalene oil extract residue

(The residue obtained from chemical
oil extracted after the removal of
naphthalene by distillation composed
primarily of two to four membered
condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons and aromatic nitrogen
bases.)

Creosote oil, low-boiling distillate;        648-138-00-6        274-566-4    70321-80-1    H
Wash oil

(The low-boiling distillation fraction
obtained from the high temperature
carbonisation of bituminous coal,
which is further refined to remove
excess crystalline salts. It consists
primarily of creosote oil with some of
the normal polynuclear aromatic salts,
which are components of coal tar
distillate, removed. It is crystal free at
approximately 38°C.)
30.12.2006       EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/565


              Substances                      Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Tar acids, cresylic, sodium salts,           648-139-00-1         272-361-4    68815-21-4   J, M
caustic solns.; Alkaline extract

Extract oils (coal), tar base; Acid          648-140-00-7         266-020-9    65996-86-3   J, M
extract

(The extract from coal tar oil alkaline
extract residue produced by an acidic
wash such as aqueous sulfuric acid
after distillation to remove
naphthalene. Composed primarily of
the acid salts of various aromatic
nitrogen bases including pyridine,
quinoline, and their alkyl derivatives.)

Tar bases, coal, crude; Crude tar            648-141-00-2         266-018-8    65996-84-1   J, M
bases

(The reaction product obtained by
neutralising coal tar base extract oil
with an alkaline solution, such as
aqueous sodium hydroxide, to obtain
the free bases. Composed primarily of
such organic bases as acridine,
phenanthridine, pyridine, quinoline
and their alkyl derivatives.)

Residues (coal), liq. solvent extn.;         648-142-00-8         302-681-2    94114-46-2   M

(A cohesive powder composed of
coal mineral matter and undissolved
coal remaining after extraction of coal
by a liquid solvent.)
L 396/566        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Coal liquids, liq. solvent extn. soln.;    648-143-00-3         302-682-8    94114-47-3   M

(The product obtained by filtration of
coal mineral matter and undissolved
coal from coal extract solution
produced by digesting coal in a liquid
solvent. A black, viscous, highly
complex liquid combination
composed primarily of aromatic and
partly hydrogenated aromatic
hydrocarbons, aromatic nitrogen
compounds, aromatic sulfur
compounds, phenolic and other
aromatic oxygen compounds and their
alkyl derivatives.)

Coal liquids, liq. solvent extn.;          648-144-00-9         302-683-3    94114-48-4   M

(The substantially solvent-free
product obtained by the distillation of
the solvent from filtered coal extract
solution produced by digesting coal in
a liquid solvent. A black semi-solid,
composed primarily of a complex
combination of condensed-ring
aromatic hydrocarbons, aromatic
nitrogen compounds, aromatic sulfur
compounds, phenolic compounds and
other aromatic oxygen compounds,
and their alkyl derivatives.)
30.12.2006        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/567


               Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Light oil (coal), coke-oven; Crude          648-147-00-5         266-012-5    65996-78-3   J
benzole

(The volatile organic liquid extracted
from the gas evolved in the high
temperature (greater than 700°C)
destructive distillation of coal.
Composed primarily of benzene,
toluene, and xylenes. May contain
other minor hydrocarbon
constituents.)

Distillates (coal), liq. solvent extn.,     648-148-00-0         302-688-0    94114-52-0   J
primary;

(The liquid product of condensation
of vapours emitted during the
digestion of coal in a liquid solvent
and boiling in the range of
approximately 30°C to 300°C.
Composed primarily of partly
hydrogenated condensed-ring
aromatic hydrocarbons, aromatic
compounds containing nitrogen,
oxygen and sulfur, and their alkyl
derivatives having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C14.)
L 396/568        EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (coal), solvent extn.,          648-149-00-6         302-689-6    94114-53-1   J
hydrocracked;

(Distillate obtained by hydrocracking
of coal extract or solution produced
by the liquid solvent extraction or
supercritical gas extraction process
and boiling in the range of
approximately 30°C to 300°C.
Composed primarily of aromatic,
hydrogenated aromatic and
naphthenic compounds, their alkyl
derivatives and alkanes with carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C4 through C14. Nitrogen, sulfur
and oxygen-containing aromatic and
hydrogenated aromatic compounds
are also present.)
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/569


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (coal), solvent extn.,            648-150-00-1         302-690-1    94114-54-2   J
hydrocracked;

(Fraction of the distillate obtained by
hydrocracking of coal extract or
solution produced by the liquid
solvent extraction or supercritical gas
extraction processes and boiling in
the range of approximately 30°C to
180°C. Composed primarily of
aromatic, hydrogenated aromatic and
naphthenic compounds, their alkyl
derivatives and alkanes with carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C4 to C9. Nitrogen, sulfur and
oxygen-containing aromatic and
hydrogenated aromatic compounds
are also present.)

Gasoline, coal solvent extn.,             648-151-00-7         302-691-7    94114-55-3   J
hydrocracked naphtha;

(Motor fuel produced by the
reforming of the refined naphtha
fraction of the products of
hydrocracking of coal extract or
solution produced by the liquid
solvent extraction or supercritical gas
extraction processes and boiling in
the range of approximately 30°C to
180°C. Composed primarily of
aromatic and naphthenic
hydrocarbons, their alkyl derivatives
and alkyl hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C4 through
C9.)
L 396/570        EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (coal), solvent extn.,          648-152-00-2         302-692-2    94114-56-4   J
hydrocracked middle;

(Distillate obtained from the
hydrocracking of coal extract or
solution produced by the liquid
solvent extraction or supercritical gas
extraction processes and boiling in
the range of approximately 180°C to
300°C. Composed primarily of
two-ring aromatic, hydrogenated
aromatic and naphthenic compounds,
their alkyl derivatives and alkanes
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C9
through C14. Nitrogen, sulfur and
oxygen-containing compounds are
also present.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/571


              Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (coal), solvent extn.,       648-153-00-8         302-693-8    94114-57-5   J
hydrocracked hydrogenated middle;

(Distillate from the hydrogenation of
hydrocracked middle distillate from
coal extract or solution produced by
the liquid solvent extraction or
supercritical gas extraction processes
and boiling in the range of
approximately 180°C to 280°C.
Composed primarily of hydrogenated
two-ring carbon compounds and their
alkyl derivatives having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C9 through C14.)

Light oil (coal), semi-coking process;   648-156-00-4         292-635-7    90641-11-5   J
Fresh oil

(The volatile organic liquid
condensed from the gas evolved in
the low temperature (less than 700°C)
destructive distillation of coal.
Composed primarily of C6-10
hydrocarbons.)

Extracts (petroleum), light naphthenic   649-001-00-3         265-102-1    64742-03-6   H
distillate solvent

Extracts (petroleum), heavy paraffinic 649-002-00-9           265-103-7    64742-04-7   H
distillate solvent

Extracts (petroleum), light paraffinic   649-003-00-4         265-104-2    6472-05-8    H
distillate solvent
L 396/572       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Extracts (petroleum), heavy               649-004-00-X         265-111-0    64742-11-6   H
naphthenic distillate solvent

Extracts (petroleum), light vacuum        649-005-00-5         295-341-7    91995-78-7   H
gas oil solvent

Hydrocarbons C26-55, arom.-rich           649-006-00-0         307-753-7    97722-04-8   H

Residues (petroleum), atm. tower;         649-008-00-1         265-045-2    64741-45-3
Heavy fuel oil

(A complex residuum from the
atmospheric distillation of crude oil.
It consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly
greater than C20 and boiling above
approximately 350°C. This stream is
likely to contain 5 wt. % or more of
4- to 6-membered condensed ring
aromatic hydrocarbons.)

Gas oils (petroleum), heavy vacuum;       649-009-00-7         265-058-3    64741-57-7
Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
vacuum distillation of the residuum
from atmospheric distillation of crude
oil. It consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C20 through C50 and boiling
in the range of approximately 350°C
to 600°C. This stream is likely to
contain 5 wt. % more of 4- to
6-membered condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/573


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), heavy             649-010-00-2         265-063-0    64741-61-3
catalytic cracked; Heavy fuel oil



(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C15 through C35 and boiling in the
range of approximately 260°C to
500°C. This stream is likely to
contain 5 wt. % or more of 4- to
6-membered condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Clarified oils (petroleum), catalytic      649-011-00-8         265-064-6    64741-62-4
cracked; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced as the
residual fraction from distillation of
the products from a catalytic cracking
process. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C20 and
boiling above approximately 350°C.
This stream is likely to contain
5 wt. % or more of 4- to 6-membered
condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Residues (petroleum), hydrocracked;        649-012-00-3         265-076-1    64741-75-9
Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced as the
residual fraction from distillation of
the products of a hydrocracking
process. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C20 and
boiling above approximately 350°C.)
L 396/574       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Residues (petroleum), thermal             649-013-00-9         265-081-9    64741-80-6
cracked; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced as the
residual fraction from distillation of
the product from a thermal cracking
process. It consists predominantly of
unsaturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly
greater than C20 and boiling above
approximately 350°C. This stream is
likely to contain 5 wt. % or more of
4- to 6-membered condensed ring
aromatic hydrocarbons.)

Distillates (petroleum), heavy thermal    649-014-00-4         265-082-4    64741-81-7
cracked; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
the products from a thermal cracking
process. It consists predominantly of
unsaturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C15 through C36 and boiling
in the range of approximately 260°C
to 480°C. This stream is likely to
contain 5 wt. % or more or 4- to
6-membered condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Gas oils (petroleum), hydrotreated        649-015-00-X         265-162-9    64742-59-2
vacuum; Heavy fuel oil
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/575


              Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
petroleum fraction with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C13 through C50 and boiling in the
range of approximately 230°C to
600°C. This stream is likely to
contain 5 wt. % or more of 4- to
6-membered condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Residues (petroleum)                      649-016-00-5        265-181-2    64742-78-5
hydrodesulphurised atmospheric
tower; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating an
atmospheric tower residuum with
hydrogen in the presence of a catalyst
under conditions primarily to remove
organic sulfur compounds. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly greater than
C20 and boiling above approximately
350°C. This stream is likely to
contain 5 wt. % or more of 4- to
6-membered condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Gas oils (petroleum),                     649-017-00-0        265-189-6    64742-86-5
hydrodesulphurised heavy vacuum;
Heavy fuel oil
L 396/576      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
catalytic hydrodesulphurisation
process. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50 and boiling in the range
of approximately 350°C to 600°C.
This stream is likely to contain
5 wt. % or more of 4- to 6-membered
condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Residues (petroleum), steam-cracked;    649-018-00-6         265-193-8    64742-90-1
Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the residual
fraction from the distillation of the
products of a steam cracking process
(including steam cracking to produce
ethylene). It consists predominantly
of unsaturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly
greater than C14 and boiling above
approximately 260°C. This stream is
likely to contain 5 wt. % or more of
4- to 6-membered condensed ring
aromatic hydrocarbons.)

Residues (petroleum), atmospheric;      649-019-00-1         269-777-3    68333-22-2
Heavy fuel oil
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/577


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex residuum from
atmospheric distillation of crude oil.
It consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly
greater than C11 and boiling above
approximately 200°C. This stream is
likely to contain 5 wt. % or more of
4- to 6-membered condensed ring
aromatic hydrocarbons.)

Clarified oils (petroleum),                649-020-00-7         269-782-0    68333-26-6
hydrodesulphurised catalytic cracked;
Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating
catalytic cracked clarified oil with
hydrogen to convert organic sulfur to
hydrogen sulfide which is removed. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly
greater than C20 and boiling above
approximately 350°C. This stream is
likely to contain 5 wt. % or more of
4- to 6-membered condensed ring
aromatic hydrocarbons.)

Distillates (petroleum),                   649-021-00-2         269-783-6    68333-27-7
hydrodesulphurised intermediate
catalytic cracked; Heavy fuel oil
L 396/578        EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                      Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating
intermediate catalytic cracked
distillates with hydrogen to convert
organic sulfur to hydrogen sulfide
which is removed. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C11
through C30 and boiling in the range
of approximately 205°C to 450°C. It
contains a relatively large proportion
of tricyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.)

Distillates (petroleum),                     649-022-00-8         269-784-1    68333-28-8
hydrodesulphurised heavy catalytic
cracked; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treatment
of heavy catalytic cracked distillates
with hydrogen to convert organic
sulfur to hydrogen sulfide which is
removed. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C15
through C35 and boiling in the range
of approximately 260°C to 500°C.
This stream is likely to contain
5 wt. % or more of 4- to 6-membered
condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Fuel oil, residues-straight-run gas          649-023-00-3         270-674-0    68476-32-4
oils, high-sulfur; Heavy fuel oil
30.12.2006       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/579


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Fuel oil, residual; Heavy fuel oil          649-024-00-9         270-675-6    68476-33-5

(The liquid product from various
refinery streams, usually residues.
The composition is complex and
varies with the source of the crude
oil.)

Residues (petroleum), catalytic             649-025-00-4         270-792-2    68478-13-7
reformer fractionator residue
distillation; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex residuum from the
distillation of catalytic reformer
fractionator residue. It boils above
approximately 399°C.)

Residues (petroleum), heavy coker           649-026-00-X         270-796-4    68478-17-1
gas oil and vacuum gas oil; Heavy
fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced as the
residual fraction from the distillation
of heavy coker gas oil and vacuum
gas oil. It predominantly consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C13 and
boiling above approximately 230°C.)

Residues (petroleum), heavy coker           649-027-00-5         270-983-0    68512-61-8
and light vacuum; Heavy fuel oil
L 396/580        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced as the
residual fraction from the distillation
of heavy coker gas oil and light
vacuum gas oil. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C13 and
boiling above approximately 230°C.)

Residues (petroleum), light vacuum;       649-028-00-0         270-984-6    68512-62-9
Heavy fuel oil

(A complex residuum from the
vacuum distillation of the residuum
from the atmospheric distillation of
crude oil. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C13 and
boiling above approximately 230°C.)

Residues (petroleum), steam-cracked       649-029-00-6         271-013-9    68513-69-9
light; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex residuum from the
distillation of the products from a
steam-cracking process. It consists
predominantly of aromatic and
unsaturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers greater than C7 and
boiling in the range of approximately
101°C to 555°C.)

Fuel oil, No 6; Heavy fuel oil            649-030-00-1         271-384-7    68553-00-4

(A distillate oil having a minimum
viscosity of 197 10-6 m2s-1 at 37,7°C
to a maximum of 197 10-5 m2s-1 at
37,7°C.)
30.12.2006        EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/581


               Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Residues (petroleum), topping plant,         649-031-00-7         271-763-7    68607-30-7
low-sulfur; Heavy fuel oil

(A low-sulfur complex combination
of hydrocarbons produced as the
residual fraction from the topping
plant distillation of crude oil. It is the
residuum after the straight-run
gasoline cut, kerosene cut and gas oil
cut have been removed.)

Gas oils (petroleum), heavy                  649-032-00-2         272-184-2    68783-08-4
atmospheric; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
distillation of crude oil. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C7
through C35 and boiling in the range
of approximately 121°C to 510°C.)

Residues (petroleum), coker scrubber, 649-033-00-8                272-187-9    68783-13-1
Condensed-ring-arom.-contg.; Heavy
fuel oil

(A very complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced as the
residual fraction from the distillation
of vacuum residuum and the products
from a thermal cracking process. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C20 and
boiling above approximately 350°C.
This stream is likely to contain
5 wt. % or more of 4- to 6-membered
condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)
L 396/582       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), petroleum        649-034-00-3        273-263-4    68955-27-1
residues vacuum; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
vacuum distillation of the residuum
from the atmospheric distillation of
crude oil.)

Residues (petroleum), steam-cracked,      649-035-00-9        273-272-3    68955-36-2
resinous; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex residuum from the
distillation of steam-cracked
petroleum residues.)

Distillates (petroleum), intermediate     649-036-00-4        274-683-0    70592-76-6
vacuum; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
vacuum distillation of the residuum
from atmospheric distillation of crude
oil. It consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C14 through C42 and boiling
in the range of approximately 250°C
to 545°C. This stream is likely to
contain 5 wt. % or more of 4- to
6-membered condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Distillates (petroleum), light vacuum;    649-037-00-X        247-684-6    70592-77-7
Heavy fuel oil
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/583


             Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
vacuum distillation of the residuum
from atmospheric distillation of crude
oil. It consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C11 through C35 and boiling
in the range of approximately 250°C
to 545°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), vacuum;          649-038-00-5         274-685-1    70592-78-8
Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
vacuum distillation of the residuum
from atmospheric distillation of crude
oil. It consists of hydrocarbons having
numbers predominantly in the range
of C15 through C50 and boiling in the
range of approximately 270°C to
600°C. This stream is likely to
contain 5 wt. % or more of 4- to
6-membered condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Gas oils (petroleum),                     649-039-00-0         285-555-9    85117-03-9
hydrodesulphurised coker heavy
vacuum; Heavy fuel oil
L 396/584       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
hydrodesulphurisation of heavy coker
distillate stocks. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range C18 to C44
and boiling in the range of
approximately 304°C to 548°C.
Likely to contain 5 wt. % or more of
4- to 6-membered condensed ring
aromatic hydrocarbons.)

Residues (petroleum), steam-cracked,     649-040-00-6        292-657-7    90669-75-3
distillates; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained during the
production of refined petroleum tar
by the distillation of steam cracked
tar. It consists predominantly of
aromatic and other hydrocarbons and
organic sulfur compounds.)

Residues (petroleum), vacuum, light;     649-041-00-1        292-658-2    90669-76-4
Heavy fuel oil

(A complex residuum from the
vacuum distillation of the residuum
from atmospheric distillation of crude
oil. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C24 and
boiling above approximately 390°C.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/585


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Fuel oil, heavy, high-sulphur; Heavy      649-042-00-7         295-396-7    92045-14-2
fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
distillation of crude petroleum. It
consists predominantly of aliphatic,
aromatic and cycloaliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly higher than C25 and
boiling above approximately 400°C.)

Residues (petroleum), catalytic           649-043-00-2         295-511-0    92061-97-7
cracking; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced as the
residual fraction from the distillation
of the products from a catalytic
cracking process. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C11 and
boiling above approximately 200°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), intermediate  649-044-00-8            295-990-6    92201-59-7
catalytic cracked, thermally degraded;
Heavy fuel oil
L 396/586       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a
catalytic cracking process which has
been used as a heat transfer fluid. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons boiling in the range of
approximately 220°C to 450°C. This
stream is likely to contain organic
sulfur compounds.)

Residual oils (petroleum); Heavy fuel    649-045-00-3         298-754-0    93821-66-0
oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons, sulfur compounds and
metal-containing organic compounds
obtained as the residue from refinery
fractionation cracking processes. It
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity above 2 10-6 m².s-1 at
100°C.)

Residues, steam cracked, thermally       649-046-00-9         308-733-0    98219-64-8
treated; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment and distillation of raw
steam-cracked naphtha. It consists
predominantly of unsaturated
hydrocarbons boiling in the range
above approximately 180°C.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/587


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Distillates (petroleum),                 649-047-00-4         309-863-0    101316-57-8
hydrodesulphurised full-range
middle; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
petroleum stock with hydrogen. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C9
through C25 and boiling in the range
of approximately 150°C to 400°C.)

Residues (petroleum), catalytic          649-048-00-X         265-069-3    64741-67-9
reformer fractionator; Heavy fuel oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced as the
residual fraction from distillation of
the product from a catalytic reforming
process. It consists of predominantly
aromatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C10 through C25 and boiling in the
range of approximately 160°C to
400°C. This stream is likely to
contain 5 wt. % or more of 4- or
6-membered condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)
L 396/588       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Petroleum; Crude oil                     649-049-00-5         232-298-5    8002-05-9

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons. It consists
predominantly of aliphatic, alicyclic
and aromatic hydrocarbons. It may
also contain small amounts of
nitrogen, oxygen and sulfur
compounds. This category
encompasses light, medium, and
heavy petroleums, as well as the oils
extended from tar sands.
Hydrocarbonaceous materials
requiring major chemical changes for
their recovery or conversion to
petroleum refinery feedstocks such as
crude shale oils; upgraded shale oils
and liquid coal fuels are not included
in this definition.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic cracked     649-062-00-6         270-755-0    68477-73-6   K
naphtha depropaniser overhead,
C3-rich acid-free; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of catalytic cracked
hydrocarbons and treated to remove
acidic impurities. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C2 through C4,
predominantly C3.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/589


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), catalytic cracker;      649-063-00-1        270-756-6    68477-74-7   K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of the products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
predominantly of aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic cracker,      649-064-00-7        270-757-1    68477-75-8   K
C1-5-rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
of aliphatic hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C1
through C6, predominantly C1 through
C5.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic polymd.       649-065-00-2        270-758-7    68477-76-9   K
naphtha stabiliser overhead, C2-4-rich;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation stabilisation of catalytic
polymerised naphtha. It consists of
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C2 through
C6, predominantly C2 through C4.)
L 396/590        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), catalytic reformer,    649-066-00-8         270-760-8    68477-79-2   K
C1-4-rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from a catalytic reforming
process. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in the range
of C1 through C6, predominantly C1
through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), C3-5                   649-067-00-3         270-765-5    68477-83-8   K
olefinic-paraffinic alkylation feed;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of olefinic
and paraffinic hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C3
through C5 which are used as
alkylation feed. Ambient
temperatures normally exceed the
critical temperature of these
combinations.)

Gases (petroleum), C4-rich;               649-068-00-9         270-767-6    68477-85-0   K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from a catalytic
fractionation process. It consists of
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C3 through
C5, predominantly C4.)
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/591


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), deethaniser            649-069-00-4         270-768-1    68477-86-1   K
overheads; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced from
distillation of the gas and gasoline
fractions from the catalytic cracking
process. It contains predominantly
ethane and ethylene.)

Gases (petroleum), deisobutaniser         649-070-00-X         270-769-7    68477-87-2   K
tower overheads; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
atmospheric distillation of a
butane-butylene stream. It consists of
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C3 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), depropaniser dry,      649-071-00-5         270-772-3    68477-90-7   K
propene-rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from the gas
and gasoline fractions of a catalytic
cracking process. It consists
predominantly of propylene with
some ethane and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), depropaniser           649-072-00-0         270-773-9    68477-91-8   K
overheads; Petroleum gas
L 396/592       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from the gas and gasoline
fractions of a catalytic cracking
process. It consists of aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C2
through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), gas recovery plant    649-073-00-6        270-777-0    68477-94-1   K
depropaniser overheads; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
fractionation of miscellaneous
hydrocarbon streams. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in the range
of C1 through C4, predominantly
propane.)

Gases (petroleum), Girbatol unit feed;   649-074-00-1        270-778-6    68477-95-2   K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons that is used as the feed
into the Girbatol unit to remove
hydrogen sulfide. It consists of
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C2 through C4.)
30.12.2006      EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/593


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), isomerised               649-075-00-7         270-782-8    68477-99-6   K
naphtha fractionator, C4-rich,
hydrogen sulfide-free; Petroleum gas

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic             649-076-00-2         270-802-5    68478-21-7   K
cracked clarified oil and thermal
cracked vacuum residue fractionation
reflux drum; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of catalytic cracked
clarified oil and thermal cracked
vacuum residue. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic             649-077-00-8         270-803-0    68478-22-8   K
cracked naphtha stabilisation
absorber; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
stabilisation of catalytic cracked
naphtha. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)
L 396/594        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic            649-078-00-3         270-804-6    68478-24-0   K
cracker, catalytic reformer and
hydrodesulphuriser combined
fractionater; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation of products from
catalytic cracking, catalytic reforming
and hydrodesulphurising processes
treated to remove acidic impurities. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic            649-079-00-9         270-806-7    68478-26-2   K
reformed naphtha fractionation
stabiliser; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation stabilisation of catalytic
reformed naphtha. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)
30.12.2006       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/595


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), saturate gas          649-080-00-4         270-813-5    68478-32-0   K
plant mixed stream, C4-rich;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation stabilisation of
straight-run naphtha, distillation tail
gas and catalytic reformed naphtha
stabiliser tail gas. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C3 through C6,
predominantly butane and isobutane.)

Tail gas (petroleum), saturate gas          649-081-00-X         270-814-0    68478-33-1   K
recovery plant, C1-2-rich; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of distillate tail gas,
straight-run naphtha, catalytic
reformed naphtha stabiliser tail gas. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C1 through C5,
predominantly methane and ethane.)
L 396/596       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), vacuum            649-082-00-5         270-815-6    68478-34-2   K
residues thermal cracker; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
thermal cracking of vacuum residues.
It consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C5.)

Hydrocarbons, C3-4-rich, petroleum      649-083-00-0         270-990-9    68512-91-4   K
distillate; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
and condensation of crude oil. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C3
through C5, predominantly C3 through
C4.)

Gases (petroleum), full-range           649-084-00-6         271-000-8    68513-15-5   K
straight-run naphtha dehexaniser off;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
fractionation of the full-range
straight-run naphtha. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C2
through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), hydrocracking        649-085-00-1         271-001-3    68513-16-6   K
depropaniser off, hydrocarbon-rich;
Petroleum gas
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/597


             Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbon produced by the
distillation of products from a
hydrocracking process. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4. It may also contain small
amounts of hydrogen and hydrogen
sulfide.)

Gases (petroleum), light straight-run     649-086-00-7         271-002-9    68513-17-7   K
naphtha stabiliser off; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
stabilisation of light straight-run
naphtha. It consists of saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C2 through C6.)

Residues (petroleum), alkylation          649-087-00-2         271-010-2    68513-66-6   K
splitter, C4-rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex residuum from the
distillation of streams from various
refinery operations. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C4 through C5,
predominantly butane, and boiling in
the range of approximately -11,7°C to
27,8°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C1-4, sweetened;            649-089-00-3         271-038-5    68514-36-3   K
Petroleum gas
L 396/598        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting
hydrocarbon gases to a sweetening
process to convert mercaptans or to
remove acidic impurities. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4 and boiling in the
range of approximately -164°C to
-0,5°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C1-3; Petroleum gas         649-090-00-9         271-259-7    68527-16-2   K

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C3 and boiling in the range of
approximately -164°C to -42°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C1-4, debutaniser           649-091-00-4         271-261-8    68527-19-5   K
fraction; Petroleum gas

Gases (petroleum), C1-5, wet;             649-092-00-X         271-624-0    68602-83-5   K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of crude oil and/or the
cracking of tower gas oil. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Hydrocarbons, C2-4; Petroleum gas         649-093-00-5         271-734-9    68606-25-7   K

Hydrocarbons, C3; Petroleum gas           649-094-00-0         271-735-4    68606-26-8   K
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/599


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), alkylation feed;      649-095-00-6         271-737-5    68606-27-9   K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
catalytic cracking of gas oil. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C3 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), depropaniser          649-096-00-1         271-742-2    68606-34-8   K
bottoms fractionation off; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation of depropaniser bottoms.
It consists predominantly of butane,
isobutane and butadiene.)

Gases (petroleum), refinery blend;       649-097-00-7         272-183-7    68783-07-3   K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination obtained
from various processes. It consists of
hydrogen, hydrogen sulfide and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic cracking;   649-098-00-2         272-203-4    68783-64-2   K
Petroleum gas
L 396/600        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of the products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C3
through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), C2-4, sweetened;        649-099-00-8         272-205-5    68783-65-3   K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting
a petroleum distillate to a sweetening
process to convert mercaptans or to
remove acidic impurities. It consists
predominantly of saturated and
unsaturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C2 through C4 and boiling in
the range of approximately -51°C to
-34°C.)

Gases (petroleum), crude oil               649-100-00-1         272-871-7    68918-99-0   K
fractionation off; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
fractionation of crude oil. It consists
of saturated aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/601


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), dehexaniser off;       649-101-00-7         272-872-2    68919-00-6   K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
fractionation of combined naphtha
streams. It consists of saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), light straight run     649-102-00-2         272-878-5    68919-05-1   K
gasoline fractionation stabiliser off;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
fractionation of light straight-run
gasoline. It consists of saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), naphtha unifiner       649-103-00-8         272-879-0    68919-06-2   K
desulphurisation stripper off;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by a naphtha
unifiner desulphurisation process and
stripped from the naphtha product. It
consists of saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)
L 396/602       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), straight-run           649-104-00-3         272-882-7    68919-09-5   K
naphtha catalytic reforming off;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
catalytic reforming of straight-run
naphtha and fractionation of the total
effluent. It consists of methane,
ethane, and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), fluidised catalytic    649-105-00-9         272-893-7    68919-20-0   K
cracker splitter overheads; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
fractionation of the charge to the
C3-C4 splitter. It consists
predominantly of C3 hydrocarbons.)

Gases (petroleum), straight-run           649-106-00-4         272-883-2    68919-10-8   K
stabiliser off; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation of the liquid from the
first tower used in the distillation of
crude oil. It consists of saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic cracked      649-107-00-X         273-169-3    68952-76-1   K
naphtha debutaniser; Petroleum gas
30.12.2006       EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/603


              Substances                      Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of catalytic cracked
naphtha. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic              649-108-00-5         273-170-9    68952-77-2   K
cracked distillate and naphtha
stabiliser; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
fractionation of catalytic cracked
naphtha and distillate. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum), thermal-cracked        649-109-00-0         273-175-6    68952-81-8   K
distillate, gas oil and naphtha
absorber; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
separation of thermal-cracked
distillates, naphtha and gas oil. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)

Tail gas (petroleum), thermal cracked        649-110-00-6         273-176-1    68952-82-9   K
hydrocarbon fractionation stabiliser,
petroleum coking; Petroleum gas
L 396/604        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation stabilisation of thermal
cracked hydrocarbons from a
petroleum coking process. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C6.)

Gases (petroleum, light                    649-111-00-1        273-265-5    68955-28-2   K
steam-cracked, butadiene conc.;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a thermal
cracking process. It consists of
hydrocarbons having a carbon
number predominantly of C4.)

Gases (petroleum), straight-run            649-112-00-7        273-270-2    68955-34-0   K
naphtha catalytic reformer stabiliser
overhead; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
catalytic reforming of straight-run
naphtha and the fractionation of the
total effluent. It consists of saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C2 through C4.)

Hydrocarbons, C4; Petroleum gas            649-113-00-2        289-339-5    87741-01-3   K

Alkanes, C1-4, C3-rich; Petroleum gas      649-114-00-8        292-456-4    90622-55-2   K
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/605


             Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), steam-cracker          649-115-00-3         295-404-9    92045-22-2   K
C3-rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a steam
cracking process. It consists
predominantly of propylene with
some propane and boils in the range
of approximately -70°C to 0°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C4, steam-cracker           649-116-00-9         295-405-4    92045-23-3   K
distillate; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of the products of a steam
cracking process. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having a carbon number of C4,
predominantly 1-butene and 2-butene,
containing also butane and isobutene
and boiling in the range of
approximately -12°C to 5°C.)

Petroleum gases, liquefied,               649-117-00-4         295-463-0    92045-80-2   K
sweetened, C4 fraction; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting
a liquified petroleum gas mix to a
sweetening process to oxidise
mercaptans or to remove acidic
impurities. It consists predominantly
of C4 saturated and unsaturated
hydrocarbons.)
L 396/606       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Hydrocarbons, C4, 1,3-butadiene-and      649-118-00-X         306-004-1    95465-89-7   K
isobutene-free; Petroleum gas

Raffinates (petroleum),                  649- 119 -00-5 307-769-4          97722-19-5   K
steam-cracked C4 fraction cuprous
ammonium acetate extn., C3-5 and
C3-5 unsaturated., butadiene-free;
Petroleum gas

Gases (petroleum), amine system          649-120-00-0         270-746-1    68477-65-6   K
feed; Refinery gas

(The feed gas to the amine system for
removal of hydrogen sulphide. It
consists primarily of hydrogen.
Carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide,
hydrogen sulfide and aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5 may also be present.)

Gases (petroleum), benzene unit          649-121-00-6         270-747-7    68477-66-7   K
hydrodesulphuriser off; Refinery gas

(Off gases produced by the benzene
unit. It consists primarily of
hydrogen. Carbon monoxide and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6, including benzene, may
also be present.)

Gases (petroleum), benzene unit          649-122-00-1         270-748-2    68477-67-8   K
recycle, hydrogen-rich; Refinery gas
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/607


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by recycling
the gases of the benzene unit. It
consists primarily of hydrogen with
various small amounts of carbon
monoxide and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C1
through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), blend oil,              649-123-00-7         270-749-8    68477-68-9   K
hydrogen-nitrogen-rich; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
of a blend oil. It consists primarily of
hydrogen and nitrogen with various
small amounts of carbon monoxide,
carbon dioxide, and aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic reformed      649-124-00-2         270-759-2    68477-77-0   K
naphtha stripper overheads; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
stabilisation of catalytic reformed
naphtha. It consists of hydrogen and
saturated hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), C6-8 catalytic          649-125-00-8         270-761-3    68477-80-5   K
reformer recycle; Refinery gas
L 396/608       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from catalytic reforming
of C6-C8 feed and recycled to
conserve hydrogen. It consists
primarily of hydrogen. It may also
contain various small amounts of
carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide,
nitrogen, and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), C6-8 catalytic          649-126-00-3         270-762-9    68477-81-6   K
reformer; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from catalytic reforming
of C6-C8 feed. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C1 through C5 and
hydrogen.)

Gases (petroleum), C6-8 catalytic          649-127-00-9         270-763-4    68477-82-7   K
reformer recycle, hydrogen-rich;
Refinery gas

Gases (petroleum), C2-return stream;       649-128-00-4         270-766-0    68477-84-9   K
Refinery gas
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/609


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
extraction of hydrogen from a gas
stream which consists primarily of
hydrogen with small amounts of
nitrogen, carbon monoxide, methane,
ethane, and ethylene. It contains
predominantly hydrocarbons such as
methane, ethane, and ethylene with
small amounts of hydrogen, nitrogen
and carbon monoxide.)

Gases (petroleum), dry sour,              649-129-00-X        270-774-4    68477-92-9   K
gas-concentration-unit-off; Refinery
gas

(The complex combination of dry
gases from a gas concentration unit. It
consists of hydrogen, hydrogen
sulphide and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C3.)

Gases (petroleum), gas concentration      649-130-00-5        270-776-5    68477-93-0   K
reabsorber distillation; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from combined gas
streams in a gas concentration
reabsorber. It consists predominantly
of hydrogen, carbon monoxide,
carbon dioxide, nitrogen, hydrogen
sulphide and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C1
through C3.)
L 396/610       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), hydrogen absorber 649-131-00-0            270-779-1    68477-96-3   K
off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained by
absorbing hydrogen from a hydrogen
rich stream. It consists of hydrogen,
carbon monoxide, nitrogen, and
methane with small amounts of C2
hydrocarbons.)

Gases (petroleum), hydrogen-rich;       649-132-00-6         270-780-7    68477-97-4   K
Refinery gas

(A complex combination separated as
a gas from hydrocarbon gases by
chilling. It consists primarily of
hydrogen with various small amounts
of carbon monoxide, nitrogen,
methane, and C2 hydrocarbons.)

Gases (petroleum), hydrotreater blend   649-133-00-1         270-781-2    68477-98-5   K
oil recycle, hydrogen-nitrogen-rich;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from recycled hydrotreated blend oil.
It consists primarily of hydrogen and
nitrogen with various small amounts
of carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide
and hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), recycle,             649-134-00-7         270-783-3    68478-00-2   K
hydrogen-rich; Refinery gas
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/611


             Substances                 Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination obtained
from recycled reactor gases. It
consists primarily of hydrogen with
various small amounts of carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide, nitrogen,
hydrogen sulphide, and saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C1 through
C5.)

Gases (petroleum), reformer          649-135-00-2           270-784-9    68478-01-3   K
make-up, hydrogen-rich; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from the reformers. It consists
primarily of hydrogen with various
small amounts of carbon monoxide
and aliphatic hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), reforming           649-136-00-8         270-785-4    68478-02-4   K
hydrotreater; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from the reforming hydrotreating
process. It consists primarily of
hydrogen, methane, and ethane with
various small amounts of hydrogen
sulphide and aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range C3
through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), reforming           649-137-00-3         270-787-5    68478-03-5   K
hydrotreater, hydrogen-methane-rich;
Refinery gas
L 396/612       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination obtained
from the reforming hydrotreating
process. It consists primarily of
hydrogen and methane with various
small amounts of carbon monoxide,
carbon dioxide, nitrogen and
saturated aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C2
through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), reforming              649-138-00-9        270-788-0    68478-04-6   K
hydrotreater make-up, hydrogen-rich;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from the reforming hydrotreating
process. It consists primarily of
hydrogen with various small amounts
of carbon monoxide and aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), thermal cracking       649-139-00-4        270-789-6    68478-05-7   K
distillation; Refinery gas

(A complex combination produced by
distillation of products from a thermal
cracking process. It consists of
hydrogen, hydrogen sulphide, carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)
30.12.2006       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/613


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic cracker     649-140-00-X         270-805-1    68478-25-1   K
refractionation absorber; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
refractionation of products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
of hydrogen and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C3.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic             649-141-00-5         270-807-2    68478-27-3   K
reformed naphtha separator; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
catalytic reforming of straight-run
naphtha. It consists of hydrogen and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic             649-142-00-0         270-808-8    68478-28-4   K
reformed naphtha stabiliser; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
stabilisation of catalytic reformed
naphtha. It consists of hydrogen and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)

Tail gas (petroleum), cracked               649-143-00-6         270-809-3    68478-29-5   K
distillate hydrotreater separator;
Refinery gas
L 396/614       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating
cracked distillates with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It consists
of hydrogen and saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum),                     649-144-00-1         270-810-9    68478-30-8   K
hydrodesulphurised straight-run
naphtha separator; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
hydrodesulphurisation of straight-run
naphtha. It consists of hydrogen and
saturated aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic reformed     649-145-00-7         270-999-8    68513-14-4   K
straight-run naphtha stabiliser
overheads; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
catalytic reforming of straight-run
naphtha followed by fractionation of
the total effluent. It consists of
hydrogen, methane, ethane and
propane.)

Gases (petroleum), reformer effluent      649-146-00-2         271-003-4    68513-18-8   K
high-pressure flash drum off;
Refinery gas
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/615


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination produced by
the high-pressure flashing of the
effluent from the reforming reactor. It
consists primarily of hydrogen with
various small amounts of methane,
ethane, and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), reformer effluent      649-147-00-8        271-005-5    68513-19-9   K
low-pressure flash drum off; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination produced by
low-pressure flashing of the effluent
from the reforming reactor. It consists
primarily of hydrogen with various
small amounts of methane, ethane,
and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), oil refinery gas       649-148-00-3        271-258-1    68527-15-1   K
distillation off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination separated by
distillation of a gas stream containing
hydrogen, carbon monoxide, carbon
dioxide and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C1
through C6 or obtained by cracking
ethane and propane. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C2, hydrogen, nitrogen, and
carbon monoxide.)

Gases (petroleum), benzene unit           649-149-00-9        271-623-5    68602-82-4   K
hydrotreater depentaniser overheads;
Refinery gas
L 396/616        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination produced by
treating the feed from the benzene
unit with hydrogen in the presence of
a catalyst followed by depentanising.
It consists primarily of hydrogen,
ethane and propane with various
small amounts of nitrogen, carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6. It may contain trace
amounts of benzene.)

Gases (petroleum), secondary               649-150-00-4         271-625-6    68602-84-6   K
absorber off, fluidised catalytic
cracker overheads fractionator;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination produced by
the fractionation of the overhead
products from the catalytic cracking
process in the fluidised catalytic
cracker. It consists of hydrogen,
nitrogen, and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C3.)

Petroleum products, refinery gases;        649-151-00-X         271-750-6    68607-11-4   K
Refinery gas

(A complex combination which
consists primarily of hydrogen with
various small amounts of methane,
ethane and propane.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/617


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), hydrocracking          649-152-00-5        272-182-1    68783-06-2   K
low-pressure separator; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained by
the liquid-vapour separation of the
hydrocracking process reactor
effluent. It consists predominantly of
hydrogen and saturated hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C3.)

Gases (petroleum), refinery; Refinery     649-153-00-0        272-338-9    68814-67-5   K
gas

(A complex combination obtained
from various petroleum refining
operations. It consists of hydrogen
and hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C3.)

Gases (petroleum), platformer             649-154-00-6        272-343-6    68814-90-4   K
products separator off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from the chemical reforming of
naphthenes to aromatics. It consists of
hydrogen and saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C2
through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), hydrotreated sour      649-155-00-1        272-775-5    68911-58-0   K
kerosine depentaniser stabiliser off;
Refinery gas
L 396/618       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(The complex combination obtained
from the depentaniser stabilisation of
hydrotreated kerosine. It consists
primarily of hydrogen, methane,
ethane, and propane with various
small amounts of nitrogen, hydrogen
sulphide, carbon monoxide and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), hydrotreated sour      649-156-00-7        272-776-0    68911-59-1   K
kerosine flash drum; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from the flash drum of the unit
treating sour kerosine with hydrogen
in the presence of a catalyst. It
consists primarily of hydrogen and
methane with various small amounts
of nitrogen, carbon monoxide, and
hydro-carbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C2 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), distillate unifiner    649-157-00-2        272-873-8    68919-01-7   K
desulphurisation stripper off;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination stripped
from the liquid product of the unifiner
desulphurisation process. It consists
of hydrogen sulphide, methane,
ethane, and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), fluidised catalytic 649-158-00-8           272-874-3    68919-02-8   K
cracker fractionation off; Refinery gas
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/619


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination produced by
the fractionation of the overhead
product of the fluidised catalytic
cracking process. It consists of
hydrogen, hydrogen sulphide,
nitrogen, and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), fluidised catalytic      649-159-00-3        272-875-9    68919-03-9   K
cracker scrubbing secondary absorber
off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination produced by
scrubbing the overhead gas from the
fluidised catalytic cracker. It consists
of hydrogen, nitrogen, methane,
ethane and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), heavy distillate         649-160-00-9        272-876-4    68919-04-0   K
hydrotreater desulphurisation stripper
off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination stripped
from the liquid product of the heavy
distillate hydrotreater
desulphurisation process. It consists
of hydrogen, hydrogen sulphide, and
saturated aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), platformer               649-161-00-4        272-880-6    68919-07-3   K
stabiliser off, light ends fractionation;
Refinery gas
L 396/620        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination obtained by
the fractionation of the light ends of
the platinum reactors of the
platformer unit. It consists of
hydrogen, methane, ethane and
propane.)

Gases (petroleum), preflash tower off, 649-162-00-X             272-881-1    68919-08-4   K
crude distillation; Refinery gas

(A complex combination produced
from the first tower used in the
distillation of crude oil. It consists of
nitrogen and saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), tar stripper off;        649-163-00-5        272-884-8    68919-11-9   K
Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained by
the fractionation of reduced crude oil.
It consists of hydrogen and
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), unifiner stripper        649-164-00-0        272-885-3    68919-12-0   K
off; Refinery gas

(A combination of hydrogen and
methane obtained by fractionation of
the products from the unifiner unit.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic             649-165-00-6        273-173-5    68952-79-4   K
hydrodesulphurised naphtha
separator; Refinery gas
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/621


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
hydrodesulphurisation of naphtha. It
consists of hydrogen, methane,
ethane, and propane.)

Tail gas (petroleum), straight-run        649-166-00-1         273-174-0    68952-80-7   K
naphtha hydrodesulphuriser; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination obtained
from the hydrodesulphurisation of
straight-run naphtha. It consists of
hydrogen and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), sponge absorber       649-167-00-7          273-269-7    68955-33-9   K
off, fluidised catalytic cracker and gas
oil desulphuriser overhead
fractionation; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained by
the fractionation of products from the
fluidised catalytic cracker and gas oil
desulphuriser. It consists of hydrogen
and hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), crude distillation     649-168-00-2         273-563-5    68989-88-8   K
and catalytic cracking; Refinery gas
L 396/622       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination produced by
crude distillation and catalytic
cracking processes. It consists of
hydrogen, hydrogen sulphide,
nitrogen, carbon monoxide and
paraffinic and olefinic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), gas oil            649-169-00-8            295-397-2    92045-15-3   K
diethanolamine scrubber off; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination produced by
desulphurisation of gas oils with
diethanolamine. It consists
predominantly of hydrogen sulphide,
hydrogen and aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), gas oil               649-170-00-3         295-398-8    92045-16-4   K
hydrodesulphurisation effluent;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained by
separation of the liquid phase from
the effluent from the hydrogenation
reaction. It consists predominantly of
hydrogen, hydrogen sulphide and
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C3.)

Gases (petroleum), gas oil               649-171-00-9         295-399-3    92045-17-5   K
hydrodesulphurisation purge;
Refinery gas
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/623


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of gases
obtained from the reformer and from
the purges from the hydrogenation
reactor. It consists predominantly of
hydrogen and aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), hydrogenator          649-172-00-4         295-400-7    92045-18-6   K
effluent flash drum off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of gases
obtained from flash of the effluents
after the hydrogenation reaction. It
consists predominantly of hydrogen
and aliphatic hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), naphtha steam         649-173-00-X         295-401-2    92045-19-7   K
cracking high-pressure residual;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained as
a mixture of the non-condensable
portions from the product of a
naphtha steam cracking process as
well as residual gases obtained during
the preparation of subsequent
products. It consists predominantly of
hydrogen and paraffinic and olefinic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5 with which natural gas
may also be mixed.)
L 396/624       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), residue visbaking      649-174-00-5        295-402-8    92045-20-0   K
off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination obtained
from viscosity reduction of residues
in a furnace. It consists predominantly
of hydrogen sulphide and paraffinic
and olefinic hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C1 through C5.)

Foots oil (petroleum), acid-treated;      649-175-00-0        300-225-7    93924-31-3   L
Foots oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treatment
of Foot's oil with sulphuric acid. It
consists predominantly of
branched-chain hydrocarbons with
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C20 through C50.)

Foots oil (petroleum), clay-treated;      649-176-00-6        300-226-2    93924-32-4   L
Foots oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treatment
of Foot's oil with natural or modified
clay in either a contacting or
percolation process to remove the
trace amounts of polar compounds
and impurities present. It consists
predominantly of branched chain
hydrocarbons with carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/625


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), C3-4; Petroleum        649-177-00-1         268-629-5    68131-75-9   K
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from the cracking of
crude oil. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in the range
of C3 through C4, predominantly of
propane and propylene, and boiling in
the range of approximately -51°C to
-1°C.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic           649-178-00-7         269-617-2    68307-98-2   K
cracked distillate and catalytic
cracked naphtha fractionation
absorber; Petroleum gas

(The complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
the products from catalytic cracked
distillates and catalytic cracked
naphtha. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C1 through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic           649-179-00-2         269-618-8    68307-99-3   K
polymerisation naphtha fractionation
stabiliser; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the fractionation
stabilisation products from
polymerisation of naphtha. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in the range
of C1 through C4.)
L 396/626        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic            649-180-00-8         269-619-3    68308-00-9   K
reformed naphtha fractionation
stabiliser, hydrogen sulphide-free;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation stabilisation of catalytic
reformed naphtha and from which
hydrogen sulphide has been removed
by amine treatment. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum), cracked              649-181-00-3         269-620-9    68308-01-0   K
distillate hydrotreater stripper;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating
thermal cracked distillates with
hydrogen in the presence of a
catalyst. It consists predominantly of
saturated hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C6.)

Tail gas (petroleum), straight-run         649-182-00-9         269-630-3    68308-10-1   K
distillate hydrodesulphuriser,
hydrogen sulphide-free; Petroleum
gas
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/627


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from catalytic
hydrodesulphurisation of straight run
distillates and from which hydrogen
sulphide has been removed by amine
treatment. It consists predominantly
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum), gas oil catalytic   649-183-00-4         269-623-5    68308-03-2   K
cracking absorber; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
distillation of products from the
catalytic cracking of gas oil. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum), gas recovery        649-184-00-X         269-624-0    68308-04-3   K
plant; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
products from miscellaneous
hydrocarbon streams. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum), gas recovery        649-185-00-5         269-625-6    68308-05-4   K
plant deethaniser; Petroleum gas
L 396/628       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
products from miscellaneous
hydrocarbon streams. It consists of
hydrocarbon having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum),                    649-186-00-0         269-626-1    68308-06-5   K
hydrodesulphurised distillate and
hydrodesulphurised naphtha
fractionator, acid-free; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of hydrodesulphurised
naphtha and distillate hydrocarbon
streams and treated to remove acidic
impurities. It consists predominantly
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum),                    649-187-00-6         269-627-7    68308-07-6   K
hydrodesulphurised vacuum gas oil
stripper, hydrogen sulphide-free;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from stripping
stabilisation of catalytic
hydrodesulphurised vacuum gas oil
and from which hydrogen sulphide
has been removed by amine
treatment. It consists predominantly
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C6.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/629


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), light                649-188-00-1        269-629-8    68308-09-8   K
straight-run naphtha stabiliser,
hydrogen sulphide-free; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation stabilisation of light
straight-run naphtha and from which
hydrogen sulphide has been removed
by amine treatment. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum),                      649-189-00-7        269-631-9    68308-11-2   K
propane-propylene alkylation feed
prep deethaniser; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
distillation of the reaction products of
propane with propylene. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)
L 396/630        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), vacuum gas oil      649-190-00-2         269-632-4    68308-12-3   K
hydrodesulphuriser, hydrogen
sulphide-free; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from catalytic
hydrodesulphurisation of vacuum gas
oil and from which hydrogen sulphide
has been removed by amine
treatment. It consists predominantly
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic cracked      649-191-00-8         270-071-2    68409-99-4   K
overheads; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from the
catalytic cracking process. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C3 through C5 and boiling in the
range of approximately -48°C to
32°C.)

Alkanes, C1-2; Petroleum gas              649-193-00-9         270-651-5    68475-57-0   K

Alkanes, C2-3; Petroleum gas              649-194-00-4         270-652-0    68475-58-1   K

Alkanes, C3-4; Petroleum gas              649-195-00-X         270-653-6    68475-59-2   K

Alkanes, C4-5; Petroleum gas              649-196-00-5         270-654-1    68475-60-5   K
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/631


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Fuel gases; Petroleum gas                  649-197-00-0         270-667-2    68476-26-6   K

(A combination of light gases. It
consists predominantly of hydrogen
and/or low molecular weight
hydrocarbons.)

Fuel gases, crude oil of distillates;      649-198-00-6         270-670-9    68476-29-9   K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of light
gases produced by distillation of
crude oil and by catalytic reforming
of naphtha. It consists of hydrogen
and hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4 and boiling in the
range of approximately -217°C to
-12°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C3-4; Petroleum gas          649-199-00-1         270-681-9    68476-40-4   K

Hydrocarbons, C4-5; Petroleum gas          649-200-00-5         270-682-4    68476-42-6   K

Hydrocarbons, C2-4, C3-rich;               649-201-00-0         270-689-2    68476-49-3   K
Petroleum gas
L 396/632        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Petroleum gases, liquefied; Petroleum       649-202-00-6        270-704-2    68476-85-7   K
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of crude oil. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C3
through C7 and boiling in the range of
approximately -40°C to 80°C.)

Petroleum gases, liquefied,                 649-203-00-1        270-705-8    68476-86-8   K
sweetened; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting
liquefied petroleum gas mix to a
sweetening process to convert
mercaptans or to remove acidic
impurities. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C3
through C7 and boiling in the range of
approximately -40°C to 80°C.)

Gases (petroleum), C3-4,                    649-204-00-7        270-724-1    68477-33-8   K
isobutane-rich; Petroleum gas
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/633


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
saturated and unsaturated
hydrocarbons usually ranging in
carbon numbers from C3 through C6,
predominantly butane and isobutane.
It consists of saturated and
unsaturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C3
through C4, predominantly
isobutane.)

Distillates (petroleum), C3-6,             649-205-00-2         270-726-2    68477-35-0   K
piperylene-rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
saturated and unsaturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons usually ranging in the
carbon numbers C3 through C6. It
consists of saturated and unsaturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C3 through C6,
predominantly piperylenes.)

Gases (petroleum), butane splitter         649-206-00-8         270-750-3    68477-69-0   K
overheads; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
distillation of the butane stream. It
consists of aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C3
through C4.)
L 396/634       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gases (petroleum), C2-3; Petroleum       649-207-00-3         270-751-9    68477-70-3   K
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a
catalytic fractionation process. It
contains predominantly ethane,
ethylene, propane, and propylene.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic-cracked     649-208-00-9         270-752-4    68477-71-4   K
gas oil depropaniser bottoms, C4-rich
acid-free; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of catalytic cracked gas
oil hydrocarbon stream and treated to
remove hydrogen sulphide and other
acidic components. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C3 through C5,
predominantly C4.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic-cracked     649-209-00-4         270-754-5    68477-72-5   K
naphtha debutaniser bottoms,
C3-5-rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
stabilisation of catalytic cracked
naphtha. It consists of aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C3
through C5.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/635


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), isomerised           649-210-00-X         269-628-2    68308-08-7   K
naphtha fractionation stabiliser;
Petroleum gas



(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation stabilisation products
from isomerised naphtha. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C1
through C4.)

Foots oil (petroleum), carbon-treated;     649-211-00-5         308-126-0    97862-76-5   L
Foot's oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of Foot's oil with activated
carbon for the removal of trace
constituents and impurities. It consists
predominantly of saturated straight
chain hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly greater than
C12.)
L 396/636       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), sweetened       649-212-00-0         265-088-7    64741-86-2   N
middle; Gas oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting
a petroleum distillate to a sweetening
process to convert mercaptans or to
remove acidic impurities. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C9 through C20 and boiling in the
range of approximately 150°C to
345°C.)

Gas oils (petroleum), solvent-refined;   649-213-00-6         265-092-9    64741-90-8   N
Gas oil – unspecified
30.12.2006      EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/637


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the raffinate
from a solvent extraction process. It
consists predominantly of aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C11
through C25 and boiling in the range
of approximately 205°C to 400°C.)

Distillates (petroleum),                   649-214-00-1         265-093-4    64741-91-9   N
solvent-refined middle; Gas oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the raffinate
from a solvent extraction process. It
consists predominantly of aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C9
through C20 and boiling in the range
of approximately 150°C to 345°C.)

Gas oils (petroleum), acid-treated;        649-215-00-7         265-112-6    64742-12-7   N
Gas oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a raffinate
from a sulphuric acid treating process.
It consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C13 through C25 and boiling
in the range of approximately 230°C
to 400°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), acid-treated      649-216-00-2         265-113-1    64742-13-8   N
middle; Gas oil – unspecified
L 396/638       EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a raffinate
from a sulphuric acid treating process.
It consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C11 through C20 and boiling
in the range of approximately 205°C
to 345°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), acid-treated       649-217-00-8         265-114-7    64742-14-9   N
light; Gas oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a raffinate
from a sulphuric acid treating process.
It consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C9 through C16 and boiling in
the range of approximately 150°C to
290°C.)

Gas oils (petroleum), chemically            649-218-00-3         265-129-9    64742-29-6   N
neutralised; Gas oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by a treating
process to remove acidic materials. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C13 through C25 and boiling
in the range of approximately 230°C
to 400°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), chemically         649-219-00-9         265-130-4    64742-30-9   N
neutralised middle; Gas oil –
unspecified
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/639


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by a treating
process to remove acidic materials. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C11 through C20 and boiling
in the range of approximately 205°C
to 345°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), clay-treated      649-220-00-4         265-139-3    64742-38-7   N
middle; Gas oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons resulting from
treatment of a petroleum fraction with
natural or modified clay, usually in a
percolation process to remove the
trace amounts of polar compounds
and impurities present. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C9
through C20 and boiling in the range
of approximately 150°C to 345°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), hydrotreated      649-221-00-X         265-148-2    64742-46-7   N
middle; Gas oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
petroleum fraction with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C11 through C25 and boiling in the
range of approximately 205°C to
400°C.)
L 396/640       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gas oils (petroleum),                    649-222-00-5         265-182-8    64742-79-6   N
hydrodesuphurised; Gas oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
petroleum stock by treating with
hydrogen to convert organic sulphur
to hydrogen sulphide which is
removed. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C13
through C25 and boiling in the range
of approximately 230°C to 400°C.)

Distillates (petroleum),                 649-223-00-0         265-183-3    64742-80-9   N
hydrodesulphurised middle; Gas oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
petroleum stock by treating with
hydrogen to convert organic sulphur
to hydrogen sulphide which is
removed. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C11
through C25 and boiling in the range
of approximately 205°C to 400°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), catalytic       649-228-00-8         270-719-4    68477-29-2   N
reformer fractionator residue,
high-boiling; Gas oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
catalytic reformer fractionator
residue. It boils in the range of
approximately 343°C to 399°C.)
30.12.2006       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/641


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), catalytic          649-229-00-3         270-721-5    68477-30-5   N
reformer fractionator residue,
intermediate-boiling; Gas oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
catalytic reformer fractionator
residue. It boils in the range of
approximately 288°C to 371°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), catalytic          649-230-00-9         270-722-0    68477-31-6   N
reformer fractionator residue,
low-boiling; Gas oil – unspecified

(The complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
catalytic reformer fractionator
residue. It boils approximately below
288°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), highly refined     649-231-00-4         292-615-8    90640-93-0   N
middle; Gas oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
subjection of a petroleum fraction to
several of the following steps:
filtration, centrifugation, atmospheric
distillation, vacuum distillation,
acidification, neutralisation and clay
treatment. It consists predominantly
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C10 through C20.)
L 396/642         EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


               Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum) catalytic           649-232-00-X         295-294-2    91995-34-5   N
reformer, heavy arom. conc.; Gas oil
– unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
distillation of a catalytically reformed
petroleum cut. It consists
predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C10
through C16 and boiling in the range
of approximately 200°C to 300°C.)

Gas oils, paraffinic; Gas oil –             649-233-00-5         300-227-8    93924-33-5   N
unspecified

(A distillate obtained from the
redistillation of a complex
combination of hydrocarbons
obtained by the distillation of the
effluents from a severe catalytic
hydrotreatment of paraffins. It boils in
the range of approximately 190°C to
330°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), solvent-refined        649-234-00-0         307-035-3    97488-96-5   N
hydrodesulphurised heavy; Gas oil –
unspecified

Hydrocarbons, C16-20, hydrotreated          649-235-00-6         307-659-6    97675-85-9   N
middle distillate, distillation lights;
Gas oil – unspecified
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/643


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as
first runnings from the vacuum
distillation of effluents from the
treatment of a middle distillate with
hydrogen. It consists predominantly
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C16 through C20 and boiling in the
range of approximately 290°C to
350°C. It produces a finished oil
having a viscosity of 2 10-6 m².s-1 at
100°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C12-20, hydrotreated         649-236-00-1        307-660-1    97675-86-0   N
paraffinic, distillation lights; Gas oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as first
runnings from the vacuum distillation
of effluents from the treatment of
heavy paraffins with hydrogen in the
presence of a catalyst. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C12
through C20 and boiling in the range
of approximately 230°C to 350°C. It
produces a finished oil having a
viscosity of 2 10-6 m².s-1 at 100°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C11-17, solvent-extd.       649-237-00-7         307-757-9    97722-08-2   N
light naphthenic; Gas oil –
unspecified
L 396/644        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by extraction
of the aromatics from a light
naphthenic distillate having a
viscosity of 2.2 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C11
through C17 and boiling in the range
of approximately 200°C to 300°C.)

Gas oils, hydrotreated; Gas oil –          649-238-00-2         308-128-1    97862-78-7    N
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
redistillation of the effluents from the
treatment of paraffins with hydrogen
in the presence of a catalyst. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C17
through C27 and boiling in the range
of approximately 330°C to 340°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), carbon-treated 649-239-00-8            309-667-5    100683-97-4   N
light paraffinic; Gas oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of a petroleum oil fraction
with activated charcoal for the
removal of traces of polar
constituents and impurities. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C12
through C28.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/645


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Distillates (petroleum), intermediate      649-240-00-3        309-668-0    100683-98-5   N
paraffinic, carbon-treated; Gas oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of petroleum with activated
charcoal for the removal of trace
polar constituents and impurities. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C16
through C36.)

Distillates (petroleum), intermediate      649-241-00-9        309-669-6    100683-99-6   N
paraffinic, clay-treated; Gas oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of petroleum with bleaching
earth for the removal of trace polar
constituents and impurities. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C16
through C36.)

Alkanes, C12-26-branched and linear;       649-242-00-4        292-454-3    90622-53-0    N

Lubricating greases; Grease                649-243-00-X        278-011-7    74869-21-9    N

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C12
through C50. May contain organic
salts of alkali metals, alkaline earth
metals, and/or aluminium
compounds.)
L 396/646       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Slack wax (petroleum); Slack wax          649-244-00-5        265-165-5    64742-61-6   N

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
petroleum fraction by solvent
crystallisation (solvent dewaxing) or
as a distillation fraction from a very
waxy crude. It consists predominantly
of saturated straight and branched
chain hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly greater than
C20.)

Slack wax (petroleum), acid-treated;      649-245-00-0        292-659-8    90669-77-5   N
Slack wax

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a raffinate
by treatment of a petroleum slack wax
fraction with sulphuric acid treating
process. It consists predominantly of
saturated straight and branched chain
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C20.)

Slack wax (petroleum), clay-treated;      649-246-00-6        292-660-3    90669-78-6   N
Slack wax

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treatment
of a petroleum slack wax fraction
with natural or modified clay in either
a contacting or percolation process. It
consists predominantly of saturated
straight and branched hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C20.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/647


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Slack wax (petroleum), hydrotreated;     649-247-00-1         295-523-6    92062-09-4   N
Slack wax

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating
slack wax with hydrogen in the
presence of a catalyst. It consists
predominantly of saturated straight
and branched chain hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C20.)

Slack wax (petroleum), low-melting;      649-248-00-7         295-524-1    92062-10-7   N
Slack wax

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
petroleum fraction by solvent
deparaffination. It consists
predominantly of saturated straight
and branched chain hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C12.)

Slack wax (petroleum), low-melting,      649-249-00-2         295-525-7    92062-11-8   N
hydrotreated; Slack wax

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treatment
of low-melting petroleum slack wax
with hydrogen in the presence of a
catalyst. It consists predominantly of
saturated straight and branched chain
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C12.)
L 396/648       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Slack wax (petroleum), low-melting,     649-250-00-8         308-155-9    97863-04-2   N
carbon-treated; Slack wax

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of low-melting slack wax
with activated carbon for the removal
of trace polar constituents and
impurities. It consists predominantly
of saturated straight and branched
chain hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly greater than
C12.)

Slack wax (petroleum), low-melting,     649-251-00-3         308-156-4    97863-05-3   N
clay-treated; Slack wax

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of low-melting petroleum
slack wax with bentonite for removal
of trace polar constituents and
impurities. It consists predominantly
of saturated straight and branched
chain hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly greater than
C12.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/649


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Slack wax (petroleum), low-melting,      649-252-00-9        308-158-5    97863-06-4    N
silicic acid-treated; Slack wax

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of low-melting petroleum
slack wax with silicic acid for the
removal of trace polar constituents
and impurities. It consists
predominantly of saturated straight
and branched chain hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C12.)

Slack wax (petroleum),                   649-253-00-4        309-723-9    100684-49-9   N
carbon-treated; Slack wax

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treatment
of petroleum slack wax with activated
charcoal for the removal of trace
polar constituents and impurities.)

Petrolatum; Petrolatum                   649-254-00-X        232-373-2    8009-03-8     N

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a semi-solid
from dewaxing paraffinic residual oil.
It consists predominantly of saturated
crystalline and liquid hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C25.)
L 396/650       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Petrolatum (petroleum), oxidised;          649-255-00-5         265-206-7    64743-01-7   N
Petrolatum

(A complex combination of organic
compounds, predominantly high
molecular weight carboxylic acids,
obtained by the air oxidation of
petrolatum.)

Petrolatum (petroleum),                    649-256-00-0         285-098-5    85029-74-9   N
alumina-treated; Petrolatum

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained when
petrolatum is treated with Al2O3 to
remove polar components and
impurities. It consists predominantly
of saturated, crystalline, and liquid
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C25.)

Petrolatum (petroleum), hydrotreated;      649-257-00-6         295-459-9    92045-77-7   N
Petrolatum

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a semi-solid
from dewaxed paraffinic residual oil
treated with hydrogen in the presence
of a catalyst. It consists
predominantly of saturated,
microcrystalline, and liquid
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C20.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/651


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Petrolatum (petroleum),                  649-258-00-1         308-149-6    97862-97-0   N
carbon-treated; Petrolatum

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of petroleum petrolatum
with activated carbon for the removal
of trace polar constituents and
impurities. It consists predominantly
of saturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly
greater than C20.)

Petrolatum (petroleum), silicic          649-259-00-7         308-150-1    97862-98-1   N
acid-treated; Petrolatum

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of petroleum petrolatum
with silicic acid for the removal of
trace polar constituents and
impurities. It consists predominantly
of saturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly
greater than C20.)
L 396/652        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Petrolatum (petroleum), clay-treated;      649-260-00-2        309-706-6    100684-33-1   N
Petrolatum

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treatment
of petrolatum with bleaching earth for
the removal of traces of polar
constituents and impurities. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of greater
than C25.)

Gasoline, natural; Low boiling point       649-261-00-8        232-349-1    8006-61-9     P
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons separated from natural
gas by processes such as refrigeration
or absorption. It consists
predominantly of saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C8 and boiling in the range of
approximately -20°C to 120°C.)

Naphtha; Low boiling point naphtha         649-262-00-3        232-443-2    8030-30-6     P

(Refined, partly refined, or unrefined
petroleum products by the distillation
of natural gas. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C5
through C6 and boiling in the range of
approximately 100°C to 200°C.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/653


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Ligroine; Low boiling point naphtha       649-263-00-9         232-453-7    8032-32-4    P

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
fractional distillation of petroleum.
This fraction boils in a range of
approximately 20°C to 135°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), heavy                649-264-00-4         265-041-0    64741-41-9   P
straight-run; Low boiling point
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of crude oil. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C6
through C12 and boiling in the range
of approximately 65°C to 230°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), full-range           649-265-00-X         265-042-6    64741-42-0   P
straight-run; Low boiling point
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of crude oil. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C11 and boiling in the range
of approximately -20°C to 220°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), light                649-266-00-5         265-046-8    64741-46-4   P
straight-run; Low boiling point
naphtha
L 396/654        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of crude oil. It consists predominantly
of aliphatic hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C4 through C10 and boiling in
the range of approximately -20°C to
180°C.)

Solvent naphtha (petroleum), light          649-267-00-0        265-192-2    64742-89-8   P
aliph.; Low boiling point naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
distillation of crude oil or natural
gasoline. It consists predominantly of
saturated hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C5 through C10 and boiling in the
range of approximately 35°C to
160°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), straight-run       649-268-00-6        270-077-5    68410-05-9   P
light; Low boiling point naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of crude oil. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C2
through C7 and boiling in the range of
approximately -88°C to 99°C.)

Gasoline, vapour-recovery; Low              649-269-00-1        271-025-4    68514-15-8   P
boiling point naphtha
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/655


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons separated from the
gases from vapour recovery systems
by cooling. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C11 and boiling in the range
of approximately -20°C to 196°C.)

Gasoline, straight-run, topping-plant;    649-270-00-7         271-727-0    68606-11-1   P
Low boiling point naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced from the
topping plant by the distillation of
crude oil. It boils in the range of
approximately 36,1°C to 193,3°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), unsweetened;         649-271-00-2         272-186-3    68783-12-0   P
Low boiling point naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced from the
distillation of naphtha streams from
various refinery processes. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C5 through C12 and boiling in the
range of approximately 0°C to
230°C.)
L 396/656       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Distillates (petroleum), light           649-272-00-8         272-931-2    68921-08-4    P
straight-run gasoline fractionation
stabiliser overheads; Low boiling
point naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C3
through C6.)

Naphtha (petroleum), heavy straight      649-273-00-3         309-945-6    101631-20-3   P
run, arom.-contg.; Low boiling point
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
distillation process of crude
petroleum. It consists predominantly
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C8 through
C12 and boiling in the range of
approximately 130°C to 210°C.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/657


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), full-range          649-274-00-9        265-066-7    64741-64-6   P
alkylate; Low boiling point modified
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of the reaction products of isobutane
with monoolefinic hydrocarbons
usually ranging in carbon numbers
from C3 through C5. It consists of
predominantly branched chain
saturated hydro-carbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C7 through C12 and boiling in
the range of approximately 90°C to
220°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), heavy alkylate;     649-275-00-4        265-067-2    64741-65-7   P
Low boiling point modified naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of the reaction products of isobutane
with monoolefinic hydrocarbons
usually ranging in carbon numbers
from C3 to C5. It consists of
predominantly branched chain
saturated hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C9 through C12 and boiling in the
range of approximately 150°C to
220°C.)
L 396/658       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), light alkylate;     649-276-00-X        265-068-8    64741-66-8   P
Low boiling point modified naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of the reaction products of isobutane
with monoolefinic hydrocarbons
usually ranging in carbon numbers
from C3 through C5. It consists of
predominantly branched chain
saturated hydro-carbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C7 through C10 and boiling in
the range of approximately 90°C to
160°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), isomerisation;      649-277-00-5        265-073-5    64741-70-4   P
Low boiling point modified naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from catalytic
isomerisation of straight chain
paraffinic C4 through C6
hydrocarbons. It consists
predominantly of saturated
hydrocarbons such as isobutane,
isopentane, 2,2-dimethylbutane,
2-methylpentane, and
3-methylpentane.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/659


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), solvent-refined     649-278-00-0        265-086-6    64741-84-0   P
light; Low boiling point modified
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the raffinate
from a solvent extraction process. It
consists predominantly of aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C5
through C11 and boiling in the range
of approximately 35°C to 190°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), solvent-refined     649-279-00-6        265-095-5    64741-92-0   P
heavy; Low boiling point modified
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the raffinate
from a solvent extraction process. It
consists predominantly of aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C7
through C12 and boiling in the range
of approximately 90°C to 230°C.)
L 396/660       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Raffinates (petroleum), catalytic          649-280-00-1         270-088-5    68410-71-9   P
reformer ethylene glycol-water
countercurrent exts.; Low boiling
point modified naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the raffinate
from the UDEX extraction process on
the catalytic reformer stream. It
consists of saturated hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C6
through C9.)

Raffinates (petroleum), reformer,          649-281-00-7         270-349-3    68425-35-4   P
Lurgi unit-sepd.; Low boiling point
modified naphtha

(The complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a raffinate
from a Lurgi separation unit. It
consists predominantly of
non-aromatic hydrocarbons with
various small amounts of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C6
through C8.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/661


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), full-range            649-282-00-2        271-267-0    68527-27-5   P
alkylate, butane-contg.; Low boiling
point modified naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of the reaction products of
isobutane with monoolefinic
hydrocarbons usually ranging in
carbon numbers from C3 through C5.
It consists of predominantly branched
chain saturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C7 through C12 with some
butanes and boiling in the range of
approximately 35°C to 200°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), naphtha steam 649-283-00-8            295-315-5    91995-53-8   P
cracking-derived, solvent-refined
light hydrotreated; Low boiling point
modified naphtha
L 396/662        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the
raffinates from a solvent extraction
process of hydrotreated light distillate
from steam-cracked naphtha.)

Naphtha (petroleum), C4-12                 649-284-00-3        295-430-0    92045-49-3   P
butane-alkylate, isooctane-rich; Low
boiling point modified naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by alkylation
of butanes. It consists predominantly
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C4 through C12, rich in isooctane,
and boiling in the range of
approximately 35°C to 210°C.)

Hydrocarbons, hydrotreated light           649-285-00-9        295-436-3    92045-55-1   P
naphtha distillates, solvent-refined;
Low boiling point modified naphtha

(A combination of hydrocarbons
obtained from the distillation of
hydrotreated naphtha followed by a
solvent extraction and distillation
process. It consists predominantly of
saturated hydrocarbons boiling in the
range of approximately 94°C to
99°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), isomerisation,        649-286-00-4        295-440-5    92045-58-4   P
C6-fraction; Low boiling point
modified naphtha
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/663


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
of a gasoline which has been
catalytically isomerised. It consists
predominantly of hexane isomers
boiling in the range of approximately
60°C to 66°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C6-7,                     649-287-00-X         295-446-8    92045-64-2   P
naphtha-cracking, solvent-refined;
Low boiling point modified naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
sorption of benzene from a
catalytically fully hydrogenated
benzene-rich hydrocarbon cut that
was distillatively obtained from
prehydrogenated cracked naphtha. It
consists predominantly of paraffinic
and naphthenic hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C6 through C7 and boiling in
the range of approximately 70°C to
100°C.)
L 396/664        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Hydrocarbons, C6-rich, hydrotreated       649-288-00-5         309-871-4    101316-67-0   P
light naphtha distillates,
solvent-refined; Low boiling point
modified naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
of hydrotreated naphtha followed by
solvent extraction. It consists
predominantly of saturated
hydrocarbons and boiling in the range
of approximately 65°C to 70°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), heavy catalytic      649-289-00-0         265-055-7    64741-54-4    P
cracked; Low boiling point
cat-cracked naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by a
distillation of products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C6 through C12 and boiling in the
range of approximately 65°C to
230°C. It contains a relatively large
proportion of unsaturated
hydrocarbons.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/665


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), light catalytic      649-290-00-6         265-056-2    64741-55-5   P
cracked; Low boiling point
cat-cracked naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C4 through C11 and boiling in the
range of approximately -20°C to
190°C. It contains a relatively large
proportion of unsaturated
hydrocarbons.)

Hydrocarbons, C3-11, catalytic cracker    649-291-00-1         270-686-6    68476-46-0   P
distillates; Low boiling point
cat-cracked naphtha
L 396/666        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillations of products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C3 through C11 and boiling in a
range approximately up to 204°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), catalytic             649-292-00-7         272-185-8    68783-09-5   P
cracked light distd.; Low boiling
point cat-cracked naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Distillates (petroleum), naphtha steam 649-293-00-2             295-311-3    91995-50-5   P
cracking-derived, hydrotreated light
arom.; Low boiling point cat-cracked
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
light distillate from steam-cracked
naphtha. It consists predominantly of
aromatic hydrocarbons.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/667


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), heavy catalytic    649-294-00-8         295-431-6    92045-50-6   P
cracked, sweetened; Low boiling
point cat-cracked naphtha



(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting
a catalytic cracked petroleum
distillate to a sweetening process to
convert mercaptans or to remove
acidic impurities. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C6
through C12 and boiling in the range
of approximately 60°C to 200°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), light catalytic 649-295-00-3            295-441-0    92045-59-5   P
cracked sweetened; Low boiling point
cat-cracked naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting
naphtha from a catalytic cracking
process to a sweetening process to
convert mercaptans or to remove
acidic impurities. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
boiling in a range of approximately
35°C to 210°C.)
L 396/668        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Hydrocarbons, C8-12,                       649-296-00-9         295-794-0    92128-94-4    P
catalytic-cracking, chem. neutralised;
Low boiling point cat-cracked
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of a cut from the catalytic
cracking process, having undergone
an alkaline washing. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in the range
of C8 through C12 and boiling in the
range of approximately 130°C to
210°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C8-12, catalytic cracker     649-297-00-4         309-974-4    101794-97-2   P
distillates; Low boiling point
cat-cracked naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
of products from a catalytic cracking
process. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C8
through C12 and boiling in the range
of approximately 140°C to 210°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C8-12, catalytic             649-298-00-X         309-987-5    101896-28-0   P
cracking, chem. neutralised,
sweetened; Low boiling point
cat-cracked naphtha
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/669


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), light catalytic     649-299-00-5         265-065-1    64741-63-5   P
reformed; Low boiling point
cat-reformed naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced from the
distillation of products from a
catalytic reforming process. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C5 through C11 and boiling in
the range of approximately 35°C to
190°C. It contains a relatively large
proportion of aromatic and branched
chain hydrocarbons. This stream may
contain 10 vol. % or more benzene.)

Naphtha (petroleum), heavy catalytic     649-300-00-9         265-070-9    64741-68-0   P
reformed; Low boiling point
cat-reformed naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced from the
distillation of products from a
catalytic reforming process. It
consists of predominantly aromatic
hydrocarbons having numbers
predominantly in the range of C7
through C12 and boiling in the range
of approximately 90°C to 230°C.)
L 396/670       EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                      Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), catalytic          649-301-00-4         270-660-4    68475-79-6   P
reformed depentaniser; Low boiling
point cat-reformed naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
products from a catalytic reforming
process. It consists predominantly of
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C3 through C6 and boiling in the
range of approximately -49°C to
63°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C2-6, C6-8 catalytic          649-302-00-X         270-687-1    68476-47-1   P
reformer; Low boiling point
cat-reformed naphtha

Residues (petroleum), C6-8 catalytic        649-303-00-5         270-794-3    68478-15-9   P
reformer; Low boiling point
cat-reformed naphtha

(A complex residuum from the
catalytic reforming of C6-8 feed. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C2 through C6.)
30.12.2006       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/671


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), light catalytic        649-304-00-0         270-993-5    68513-03-1   P
reformed, arom.-free; Low boiling
point cat-reformed naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
distillation of products from a
catalytic reforming process. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C5
through C8 and boiling in the range of
approximately 35°C to 120°C. It
contains a relatively large proportion
of branched chain hydrocarbons with
the aromatic components removed.)

Distillates (petroleum), catalytic          649-305-00-6         271-008-1    68513-63-3   P
reformed straight-run naphtha
overheads; Low boiling point
cat-reformed naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
catalytic reforming of straight-run
naphtha followed by the fractionation
of the total effluent. It consists of
saturated aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C2
through C6.)

Petroleum products, hydrofiner-             649-306-00-1         271-058-4    68514-79-4   P
powerformer reformates; Low boiling
point cat-reformed naphtha
L 396/672       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(The complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained in a
hydrofiner-powerformer process and
boiling in a range of approximately
27°C to 210°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum, full-range           649-307-00-7        272-895-8    68919-37-9   P
reformed; Low boiling point
cat-reformed naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of the products from a
catalytic reforming process. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C5 through C12 and boiling in
the range of approximately 35°C to
230°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), catalytic           649-308-00-2        273-271-8    68955-35-1   P
reformed; Low boiling point
cat-reformed naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a
catalytic reforming process. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C4 through C12 and boiling in
the range of approximately 30°C to
220°C. It contains a relatively large
proportion of aromatic and branched
chain hydrocarbons. This stream may
contain 10 vol. % or more benzene.)
30.12.2006      EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/673


             Substances                      Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), catalytic          649-309-00-8         285-509-8    85116-58-1   P
reformed hydrotreated light, C8-12
arom. fraction; Low boiling point
cat-reformed naphtha

(A complex combination of
alkylbenzenes obtained by the
catalytic reforming of petroleum
naphtha. It consists predominantly of
alkylbenzenes having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C8
through C10 and boiling in the range
of approximately 160°C to 180°C.)

Aromatic hydrocarbons, C8, catalytic        649-310-00-3         295-279-0    91995-18-5   P
reforming-derived; Low boiling point
cat-reformed naphtha

Aromatic hydrocarbons, C7-12,               649-311-00-9         297-401-8    93571-75-6   P
C8-rich; Low boiling point
cat-reformed naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by separation
from the platformate-containing
fraction. It consists predominantly of
aromatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C7 through C12 (primarily C8) and
can contain nonaromatic
hydrocarbons, both boiling in the
range of approximately 130°C to
200°C.)
L 396/674       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gasoline, C5-11, high-octane stabilised   649-312-00-4        297-458-9    93572-29-3   P
reformed; Low boiling point
cat-reformed naphtha

(A complex high octane combination
of hydrocarbons obtained by the
catalytic dehydrogenation of a
predominantly naphthenic naphtha. It
consists predominantly of aromatics
and non-aromatics having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C5 through C11 and boiling in the
range of approximately 45°C to
185°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C7-12, C > 9--arom.-        649-313-00-X        297-465-7    93572-35-1   P
rich, reforming heavy fraction; Low
boiling point cat-reformed naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by separation
from the platformate-containing
fraction. It consists predominantly of
nonaromatic hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C7 through C12 and boiling in
the range of approximately 120°C to
210°C and C9 and higher aromatic
hydrocarbons.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/675


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Hydrocarbons, C5-11, nonaroms.-rich,       649-314-00-5        297-466-2    93572-36-2   P
reforming light fraction; Low boiling
point cat-reformed naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by separation
from the platformate-containing
fraction. It consists predominantly of
nonaromatic hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C5 to C11 and boiling in the
range of approximately 35°C to
125°C, benzene and toluene.)

Foots oil (petroleum), silicic             649-315-00-0        308-127-6    97862-77-6   L
acid-treated; Foots oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of Foots oil with silicic acid
for removal of trace constituents and
impurities. It consists predominantly
of straight chain hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly
greater than C12.)
L 396/676       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), light thermal       649-316-00-6        265-075-6    64741-74-8   P
cracked; Low boiling point thermally
cracked naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from distillation of
products from a thermal cracking
process. It consists predominantly of
unsaturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C4 through C8 and boiling in
the range of approximately −10°C to
130°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), heavy thermal       649-317-00-1        265-085-0    64741-83-9   P
cracked; Low boiling point thermally
cracked naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from distillation of
products from a thermal cracking
process. It consists predominantly of
unsaturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C6 through C12 and boiling in
the range of approximately 65°C to
220°C.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/677


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), heavy arom.;    649-318-00-7         267-563-4    67891-79-6   P
Low boiling point thermally cracked
naphtha

(The complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
products from the thermal cracking of
ethane and propane. This higher
boiling fraction consists
predominantly of C5-C7 aromatic
hydrocarbons with some unsaturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having a
carbon number predominantly of C5.
This stream may contain benzene.)

Distillates (petroleum), light arom.;    649-319-00-2         267-565-5    67891-80-9   P
Low boiling point thermally cracked
naphtha

(The complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
products from the thermal cracking of
ethane and propane. This lower
boiling fraction consists
predominantly of C5-C7 aromatic
hydrocarbons with some unsaturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having a
carbon number predominantly of C5.
This stream may contain benzene.)

Distillates (petroleum),                 649-320-00-8         270-344-6    68425-29-6   P
naphtha-raffinate pyrolyzate-derived,
gasoline-blending; Low boiling point
thermally cracked naphtha
L 396/678       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(The complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
pyrolysis fractionation at 816°C of
naphtha and raffinate. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having a carbon number of C9 and
boiling at approximately 204°C.)

Aromatic hydrocarbons, C6-8,              649-321-00-3         270-658-3    68475-70-7   P
naphtha-raffinate pyrolyzate-derived;
Low boiling point thermally cracked
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
fractionation pyrolysis at 816°C of
naphtha and raffinate. It consists
predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C6
through C8, including benzene.)

Distillates (petroleum), thermal          649-322-00-9         271-631-9    68603-00-9   P
cracked naphtha and gas oil; Low
boiling point thermally cracked
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of thermally cracked naphtha and/or
gas oil. It consists predominantly of
olefinic hydrocarbons having a
carbon number of C5 and boiling in
the range of approximately 33°C to
60°C.)
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/679


             Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), thermal          649-323-00-4         271-632-4    68603-01-0   P
cracked naphtha and gas oil,
C5-dimer-contg.; Low boiling point
thermally cracked naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
extractive distillation of thermal
cracked naphtha and/or gas oil. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having a carbon
number of C5 with some dimerised
C5 olefins and boiling in the range of
approximately 33°C to 184°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), thermal          649-324-00-X         271-634-5    68603-03-2   P
cracked naphtha and gas oil,
extractive; Low boiling point
thermally cracked naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
extractive distillation of thermal
cracked naphtha and/or gas oil. It
consists of paraffinic and olefinic
hydrocarbons predominantly
isoamylenes such as 2-methyl-1-
butene and 2-methyl-2-butene and
boiling in the range of approximately
31°C to 40°C.)
L 396/680       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), light thermal    649-325-00-5         273-266-0    68955-29-3   P
cracked, debutanised arom.; Low
boiling point thermally cracked
naphtha



(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a thermal
cracking process. It consists
predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons, primarily benzene.)

Naphtha (petroleum), light thermal        649-326-00-0         295-447-3    92045-65-3   P
cracked, sweetened; Low boiling
point thermally cracked naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting
a petroleum distillate from the high
temperature thermal cracking of
heavy oil fractions to a sweetening
process to convert mercaptans. It
consists predominantly of aromatics,
olefins and saturated hydrocarbons
boiling in the range of approximately
20°C to 100°C.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/681


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), hydrotreated          649-327-00-6         265-150-3    64742-48-9   P
heavy; Low boiling point hydrogen
treated naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
petroleum fraction with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C6 through C13 and boiling in the
range of approximately 65°C to
230°C.)
L 396/682        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), hydrotreated          649-328-00-1         265-151-9    64742-49-0   P
light; Low boiling point hydrogen
treated naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
petroleum fraction with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C4 through C11 and boiling in the
range of approximately -20°C to
190°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum),                       649-329-00-7         265-178-6    64742-73-0   P
hydrodesulphurised light; Low
boiling point hydrogen treated
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
catalytic hydrodesulphurisation
process. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C11 and boiling in the range
of approximately -20°C to 190°C.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/683


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum),                     649-330-00-2         265-185-4    64742-82-1   P
hydrodesulphurised heavy; Low
boiling point hydrogen treated
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
catalytic hydrodesulphurisation
process. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C7
through C12 and boiling in the range
of approximately 90°C to 230°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), hydrotreated    649-331-00-8         270-092-7    68410-96-8   P
middle, intermediate boiling; Low
boiling point hydrogen treated
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
distillation of products from a middle
distillate hydrotreating process. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C5 through C10 and boiling in
the range of approximately 127°C to
188°C.)
L 396/684        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), light distillate   649-332-00-3        270-093-2    68410-97-9   P
hydrotreating process, low-boiling;
Low boiling point hydrogen treated
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
distillation of products from the light
distillate hydrotreating process. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C6 through C9 and boiling in
the range of approximately 3°C to
194°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), hydrotreated       649-333-00-9        270-094-8    68410-98-0   P
heavy naphtha, deisohexaniser
overheads; Low boiling point
hydrogen treated naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
of the products from a heavy naphtha
hydrotreating process. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C3
through C6 and boiling in the range of
approximately −49°C to 68°C.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/685


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Solvent naphtha (petroleum), light         649-334-00-4         270-988-8    68512-78-7   P
arom., hydrotreated; Low boiling
point hydrogen treated naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
petroleum fraction with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It consists
predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C8
through C10 and boiling in the range
of approximately 135°C to 210°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum),                       649-335-00-X         285-511-9    85116-60-5   P
hydrodesulphurised thermal cracked
light; Low boiling point hydrogen
treated naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
fractionation of hydrodesulphurised
thermal cracker distillate. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C5 to
C11 and boiling in the range of
approximately 23°C to 195°C.)
L 396/686        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), hydrotreated          649-336-00-5        285-512-4    85116-61-6   P
light, cycloalkane-contg.; Low
boiling point hydrogen treated
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
distillation of a petroleum fraction. It
consists predominantly of alkanes and
cycloalkanes boiling in the range of
approximately −20°C to 190°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), heavy                 649-337-00-0        295-432-1    92045-51-7   P
steam-cracked, hydrogenated; Low
boiling point hydrogen treated
naphtha

Naphtha (petroleum),                       649-338-00-6        295-433-7    92045-52-8   P
hydrodesulphurised full-range; Low
boiling point hydrogen treated
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
catalytic hydrodesulphurisation
process. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C11 and boiling in the range
of approximately 30°C to 250°C.)
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/687


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), hydrotreated         649-339-00-1         295-438-4    92045-57-3   P
light steam-cracked; Low boiling
point hydrogen treated naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
petroleum fraction, derived from a
pyrolysis process, with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It consists
predominantly of unsaturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C5
through C11 and boiling in the range
of approximately 35°C to 190°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C4-12,                      649-340-00-7         295-443-1    92045-61-9   P
naphtha-cracking, hydrotreated; Low
boiling point hydrogen treated
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
from the product of naphtha steam
cracking process and subsequent
catalytic selective hydrogenation of
gum formers. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C12 and boiling in the range
of approximately 30°C to 230°C.)
L 396/688       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Solvent naphtha (petroleum),              649-341-00-2        295-529-9    92062-15-2   P
hydrotreated light naphthenic; Low
boiling point hydrogen treated
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
petroleum fraction with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It consists
predominantly of cycloparaffinic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C6
through C7 and boiling in the range of
approximately 73°C to 85°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), light                649-342-00-8        296-942-7    93165-55-0   P
steam-cracked, hydrogenated; Low
boiling point hydrogen treated
naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced from the
separation and subsequent
hydrogenation of the products of a
steam-cracking process to produce
ethylene. It consists predominantly of
saturated and unsaturated paraffins,
cyclic paraffins and cyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C10 and boiling in the range
of approximately 50°C to 200°C. The
proportion of benzene hydrocarbons
may vary up to 30 wt. % and the
stream may also contain small
amounts of sulphur and oxygenated
compounds.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/689


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Hydrocarbons, C6-11, hydrotreated,       649-343-00-3         297-852-0    93763-33-8   P
dearomatised; Low boiling point
hydrogen treated naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as solvents
which have been subjected to
hydrotreatment in order to convert
aromatics to naphthenes by catalytic
hydrogenation.)

Hydrocarbons, C9-12, hydrotreated,       649-344-00-9         297-853-6    93763-34-9   P
dearomatised; Low boiling point
hydrogen treated naphtha

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as solvents
which have been subjected to
hydrotreatment in order to convert
aromatics to naphthenes by catalytic
hydrogenation.)

Stoddard solvent; Low boiling point      649-345-00-4         232-489-3    8052-41-3    P
naphtha – unspecified

(A colourless, refined petroleum
distillate that is free from rancid or
objectionable odours and that boils in
a range of approximately 149°C to
205°C.)
L 396/690        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Natural gas condensates (petroleum);       649-346-00-X        265-047-3    64741-47-5   P
Low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons separated as a liquid
from natural gas in a surface separator
by retrograde condensation. It
consists mainly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C2 to
C20. It is a liquid at atmospheric
temperature and pressure.)

Natural gas (petroleum), raw liq. mix;     649-347-00-5        265-048-9    64741-48-6   P
Low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons separated as a liquid
from natural gas in a gas recycling
plant by processes such as
refrigeration or absorption. It consists
mainly of saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C2 through C8.)
30.12.2006     EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/691


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), light               649-348-00-0         265-071-4    64741-69-1   P
hydrocracked; Low boiling point
naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from distillation of the
products from a hydrocracking
process. It consists predominantly of
saturated hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C4 through C10, and boiling in the
range of approximately −20°C to
180°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum) heavy                649-349-00-6         265-079-8    64741-78-2   P
hydrocracked; Low boiling point
naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from distillation of the
products from a hydrocracking
process. It consists predominantly of
saturated hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C6 through C12, and boiling in the
range of approximately 65°C to
230°C.)
L 396/692       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), sweetened;           649-350-00-1        265-089-2    64741-87-3   P
Low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting
a petroleum naphtha to a sweetening
process to convert mercaptans or to
remove acidic impurities. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C4 through C12 and boiling in the
range of approximately -10°C to
230°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), acid-treated;        649-351-00-7        265-115-2    64742-15-0   P
Low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a raffinate
from a sulphuric acid treating process.
It consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C7 through C12 and boiling in
the range of approximately 90°C to
230°C.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/693


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), chemically          649-352-00-2         265-122-0    64742-22-9   P
neutralised heavy; Low boiling point
naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by a treating
process to remove acidic materials. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C6 through C12 and boiling in
the range of approximately 65°C to
230°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), chemically          649-353-00-8         265-123-6    64742-23-0   P
neutralised light; Low boiling point
naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by a treating
process to remove acidic materials. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C4 through C11 and boiling in
the range of approximately -20°C to
190°C.)
L 396/694       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), catalytic            649-354-00-3         265-170-2    64742-66-1   P
dewaxed; Low boiling point naphtha
– unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
catalytic dewaxing of a petroleum
fraction. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C5
through C12 and boiling in the range
of approximately 35°C to 230°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), light                649-355-00-9         265-187-5    64742-83-2   P
steam-cracked; Low boiling point
naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
distillation of the products from a
steam cracking process. It consists
predominantly of unsaturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C11 and boiling in the range
of approximately -20°C to 190°C.
This stream is likely to contain
10 vol. % or more benzene.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/695


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Solvent naphtha (petroleum), light       649-356-00-4         265-199-0    64742-95-6   P
arom.; Low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
distillation of aromatic streams. It
consists predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C8
through C10 and boiling in the range
of approximately 135°C to 210°C.)

Aromatic hydrocarbons, C6-10,            649-357-00-X         268-618-5    68131-49-7   P
acid-treated, neutralised; Low boiling
point naphtha – unspecified

Distillates (petroleum), C3-5,           649-358-00-5         270-725-7    68477-34-9   P
2-methyl-2-butene-rich; Low boiling
point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
hydrocarbons usually ranging in
carbon numbers from C3 through C5,
predominantly isopentane and
3-methyl-1-butene. It consists of
saturated and unsaturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C3 through C5,
predominantly 2-methyl-2-butene.)
L 396/696       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), polymd.         649-359-00-0         270-735-1    68477-50-9   P
steam-cracked petroleum distillates,
C5-12 fraction; Low boiling point
naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
distillation of polymerised
steam-cracked petroleum distillate. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C5
through C12.)

Distillates (petroleum),                 649-360-00-6         270-736-7    68477-53-2   P
steam-cracked, C5-12 fraction; Low
boiling point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of organic
compounds obtained by the
distillation of products from a steam
cracking process. It consists of
unsaturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C5 through C12.)

Distillates (petroleum),                 649-361-00-1         270-738-8    68477-55-4   P
steam-cracked, C5-10 fraction, mixed
with light steam-cracked petroleum
naphtha C5 fraction; Low boiling
point naphtha – unspecified
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/697


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Extracts (petroleum), cold-acid, C4-6;   649-362-00-7         270-741-4    68477-61-2    P
Low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified

(A complex combination of organic
compounds produced by cold acid
unit extraction of saturated and
unsaturated aliphatic hydrocarbons
usually ranging in carbon numbers
from C3 through C6, predominantly
pentanes and amylenes. It consists
predominantly of saturated and
unsaturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range of C4
through C6, predominantly C5.)

Distillates (petroleum), depentaniser    649-363-00-2         270-771-8    68477-894-4   P
overheads; Low boiling point naphtha
– unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
catalytic cracked gas stream. It
consists of aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C6.)
L 396/698       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Residues (petroleum), butane splitter    649-364-00-8         270-791-7    68478-12-6   P
bottoms; Low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified

(A complex residuum from the
distillation of butane stream. It
consists of aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C6.)

Residual oils (petroleum),               649-365-00-3         270-795-9    68478-16-0   P
deisobutaniser tower; Low boiling
point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex residuum from the
atmospheric distillation of the
butane-butylene stream. It consists of
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C4 through C6.)

Naphtha (petroleum), full-range          649-366-00-9         270-991-4    68513-02-0   P
coker; Low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a fluid
coker. It consists predominantly of
unsaturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C4 through C15 and boiling in
the range of approximately 43°C to
250°C.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/699


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), steam-cracked       649-367-00-4         271-138-9    68516-20-1   P
middle arom.; Low boiling point
naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a
steam-cracking process. It consists
predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C7
through C12 and boiling in the range
of approximately 130°C to 220°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), clay-treated        649-368-00-X         271-262-3    68527-21-9   P
full-range straight-run; Low boiling
point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons resulting from
treatment of full-range straight-run,
naphtha with natural or modified clay,
usually in a percolation process to
remove the trace amounts of polar
compounds and impurities present. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C4 through C11 and boiling in
the range of approximately -20°C to
220°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), clay-treated        649-369-00-5         271-263-9    68527-22-0   P
light straight-run; Low boiling point
naphtha – unspecified
L 396/700       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons resulting from
treatment of light straight-run naphtha
with a natural or modified clay,
usually in a percolation process to
remove the trace amounts of polar
compounds and impurities, present. It
consists of hydro-carbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C7 through C10 and boiling in
the range of approximately 93°C to
180°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), light                649-370-00-0        271-264-4    68527-23-1   P
steam-cracked arom.; Low boiling
point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from a steam-cracking
process. It consists predominantly of
aromatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C7 through C9, and boiling in the
range of approximately 110°C to
165°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), light                649-371-00-6        271-266-5    68527-26-4   P
steam-cracked, debenzenised; Low
boiling point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of products from a steam-cracking
process. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C12 and boiling in the range
of approximately 80°C to 218°C.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/701


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), arom.-contg.;       649-372-00-1         271-635-0    68603-08-7   P
Low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified

Gasoline, pyrolysis, debutaniser         649-373-00-7         271-726-5    68606-10-0   P
bottoms; low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
fractionation of depropaniser bottoms.
It consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly
greater than C5.)

Naphtha (petroleum), light,          649-374-00-2             272-206-0    68783-66-4   P
sweetened; Low boiling point naphtha
– unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting
a petroleum distillate to a sweetening
process to convert mercaptans or to
remove acidic impurities. It consists
predominantly of saturated and
unsaturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C3 through C6 and boiling in
the range of approximately -20°C to
100°C.)
L 396/702       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Natural gas condensates; Low boiling     649-375-00-8         272-896-3    68919-39-1   J
point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons separated and/or
condensed from natural gas during
transportation and collected at the
wellhead and/or from the production,
gathering, transmission, and
distribution pipelines in deeps,
scrubbers, etc. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C2
through C8.)

Distillates (petroleum), naphtha         649-376-00-3         272-932-8    68921-09-5   P
unifiner stripper; Low boiling point
naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by stripping
the products from the naphtha
unifiner. It consists of saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C2 through C6.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/703


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), catalytic            649-377-00-9        285-510-3    85116-59-2   P
reformed light, arom.-free fraction;
Low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons remaining after
removal of aromatic compounds from
catalytic reformed light naphtha in a
selective absorption process. It
consists predominantly of paraffinic
and cyclic compounds having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C5 to C8 and boiling in the range of
approximately 66°C to 121°C.)

Gasoline; Low boiling point naphtha       649-378-00-4        289-220-8    86290-81-5   P
– unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons consisting primarily of
paraffins, cycloparaffins, aromatic
and olefinic hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly
greater than C3 and boiling in the
range of 30°C to 260°C.)
L 396/704       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Aromatic hydrocarbons, C7-8,             649-379-00-X        292-698-0    90989-42-7   P
dealkylation products, distillation
residues; Low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified

Hydrocarbons, C4-6, depentaniser         649-380-00-5        295-298-4    91995-38-9   P
lights, arom. hydrotreater; Low
boiling point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as first
runnings from the depentaniser
column before hydrotreatment of the
aromatic charges. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C6, predominantly pentanes
and pentenes, and boiling in the range
of approximately 25°C to 40°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), heat-soaked     649-381-00-0        295-302-4    91995-41-4   P
steam-cracked naphtha, C5-rich; Low
boiling point naphtha – unspecified
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/705


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
of heat-soaked steam-cracked
naphtha. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C4 through C6,
predominantly C5.)

Extracts (petroleum), catalytic           649-382-00-6        295-331-2    91995-68-5   P
reformed light naphtha solvent; low
boiling point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the extract
from the solvent extraction of a
catalytically reformed petroleum cut.
It consists predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C7
through C8 and boiling in the range of
approximately 100°C to 200°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum),                      649-383-00-1        295-434-2    92045-53-9   P
hydrodesulphurised light,
dearomatised; low boiling point
naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
of hydrodesulphurised and
dearomatised light petroleum
fractions. It consists predominantly of
C7 paraffins and cycloparaffins
boiling in a range of approximately
90°C to 100°C.)
L 396/706       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), light, C5-rich,    649-384-00-7         295-442-6    92045-60-8   P
sweetened; low boiling point naphtha
– unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting
a petroleum naphtha to a sweetening
process to convert mercaptans or to
remove acidic impurities. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C4 through C5, predominantly C5,
and boiling in the range of
approximately -10°C to 35°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C8-11,                    649-385-00-2         295-444-7    92045-62-0   P
naphtha-cracking, toluene cut; low
boiling point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
from prehydrogenated cracked
naphtha. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C8
through C11 and boiling in the range
of approximately 130°C to 205°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C4-11,                    649-386-00-8         295-445-2    92045-63-1   P
naphtha-cracking; arom.-free; low
boiling point naphtha – unspecified
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/707


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
prehydrogenated cracked naphtha
after distillative separation of
benzene- and toluene-containing
hydrocarbon cuts and a higher boiling
fraction. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C11 and boiling in the range
of approximately 30°C to 205°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), light               649-387-00-3         296-028-8    92201-97-3   P
heat-soaked, steam-cracked; low
boiling point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
fractionation of steam cracked
naphtha after recovery from a heat
soaking process. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C4
through C6 and boiling in the range of
approximately 0°C to 80°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), C6-rich; low    649-388-00-9         296-903-4    93165-19-6   P
boiling point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from the
distillation of a petroleum feedstock.
It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
of C5 through C7, rich in C6, and
boiling in the range of approximately
60°C to 70°C.)
L 396/708       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Gasoline, pyrolysis, hydrogenated;      649-389-00-4         302-639-3    94114-03-1   P
low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified

(A distillation fraction from the
hydrogenation of pyrolysis gasoline
boiling in the range of approximately
20°C to 200°C.)

Distillates (petroleum),                649-390-00-X         305-750-5    95009-23-7   P
steam-cracked, C8-12 fraction,
polymd., distillation lights; low
boiling point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
of the polymerised C8 through C12
fraction from steam-cracked
petroleum distillates. It consists
predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C8
through C12.)

Extracts (petroleum); heavy naphtha     649-391-00-5         308-261-5    97926-43-7   P
solvent, clay-treated; low boiling
point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of heavy naphthic solvent
petroleum extract with bleaching
earth. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C6
through C10, and boiling in the range
of approximately 80°C to 180°C.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/709


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Naphtha (petroleum), light                649-392-00-0         308-713-1    98219-46-6    P
steam-cracked, debenzenised,
thermally treated; low boiling point
naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment and distillation of
debenzenised light steam-cracked
petroleum naphtha. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C7
through C12 and boiling in the range
of approximately 95°C to 200°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), light                649-393-00-6         308-714-7    98219-47-7    P
steam-cracked, thermally treated; low
boiling point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment and distillation of light
steam-cracked petroleum naphtha. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C5
through C6 and boiling in the range of
approximately 35°C to 80°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), C7-9, C8-rich,   649-394-00-1         309-862-5    101316-56-7   P
hydrodesulphurised dearomatised;
low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified
L 396/710       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
distillation of petroleum light
fraction, hydrodesulphurised and
dearomatised. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in the range
of C7 through C9, predominantly C8
paraffins and cycloparaffins, boiling
in the range of approximately 120°C
to 130°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C6-8, hydrogenated         649-395-00-7         309-870-9    101316-66-9   P
sorption-dearomatised, toluene
raffination; low boiling point naphtha
– unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained during the
sorption of toluene from a
hydrocarbon fraction from cracked
gasoline treated with hydrogen in the
presence of a catalyst. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C6
through C8 and boiling in the range of
approximately 80°C to 135°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum),                     649-396-00-2         309-879-8    101316-76-1   P
hydrodesulphurised full-range coker;
low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified
30.12.2006      EN                   Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/711


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
fractionation from
hydrodesulphurised coker distillate. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C5 to
C11 and boiling in the range of
approximately 23°C to 196°C.)

Naphtha (petroleum), sweetened              649-397-00-8         309-976-5    101795-01-1   P
light; low boiling point naphtha –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by subjecting
a petroleum naphtha to a sweetening
process to convert mercaptans or to
remove acidic impurities. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C5
through C8 and boiling in the range of
approximately 20°C to 130°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C3-6, C5-rich,                649-398-00-3         310-012-0    102110-14-5   P
steam-cracked naphtha; low boiling
point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
of steam-cracked naphtha. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in the range
of C3 through C6, predominantly C5.)
L 396/712       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Hydrocarbons, C5-rich,                  649-399-00-9         310-013-6    102110-15-6   P
dicyclopentadiene-contg.; low boiling
point naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
of the products from a steam-cracking
process. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
of C5 and dicyclopentadiene and
boiling in the range of approximately
30°C to 170°C.)

Residues (petroleum), steam-cracked     649-400-00-2         310-057-6    102110-55-4   P
light, arom.; low boiling point
naphtha – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
distillation of the products of steam
cracking or similar processes after
taking off the very light products
resulting in a residue starting with
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
greater than C5. It consists
predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
greater than C5 and boiling above
approximately 40°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C ≥ 5, C5-6-rich; low     649-401-00-8         270-690-8    68476-50-6    P
boiling point naphtha – unspecified

Hydrocarbons, C5-rich; low boiling      649-402-00-3         270-695-5    68476-55-1    P
point naphtha – unspecified

Aromatic hydrocarbons, C8-10; Light     649-403-00-9         292-695-4    90989-39-2    P
oil redistillate, high boiling
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/713


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), light catalytic   649-435-00-3         265-060-4    64741-59-9
cracked; Cracked gas oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C9 through C25 and boiling in the
range of approximately 150°C to
400°C. It contains a relatively large
proportion of bicyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Distillates (petroleum), intermediate      649-436-00-9         265-062-5    64741-60-2
catalytic cracked; Cracked gas oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a
catalytic cracking process. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C11 through C30 and boiling in the
range of approximately 205°C to
450°C. It contains a relatively large
proportion of tricyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons.)
L 396/714        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), light thermal     649-438-00-X         265-084-5    64741-82-8
cracked; Cracked gas oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
the products from a thermal cracking
process. It consists predominantly of
unsaturated hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C10 through C22 and boiling
in the range of approximately 160°C
to 370°C.)

Distillates (petroleum),                   649-439-00-5         269-781-5    68333-25-5
hydrodesulphurised light catalytic
cracked; Cracked gas oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating
light catalytic cracked distillates with
hydrogen to convert organic sulphur
to hydrogen sulphide which is
removed. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C9
through C25 and boiling in the range
of approximately 150°C to 400°C. It
contains a relatively large proportion
of bicyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/715


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), light          649-440-00-0         270-662-5    68475-80-9
steam-cracked naphtha; Cracked gas
oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the multiple
distillation of products from a steam
cracking process. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C10
through C18.)

Distillates (petroleum), cracked        649-441-00-6         270-727-8    68477-38-3
steam-cracked petroleum distillates;
Cracked gas oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distilling
cracked steam cracked distillate
and/or its fractionation products. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C10 to low molecular weight
polymers.)

Gas oils (petroleum), steam-cracked;    649-442-00-1         271-260-2    68527-18-4
Cracked gas oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by distillation
of the products from a steam cracking
process. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C9 and
boiling in the range of from
approximately 205°C to 400°C.)
L 396/716       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum),                649-443-00-7         285-505-6    85116-53-6
hydrodesulphurised thermal cracked
middle; Cracked gas oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
fractionation from
hydrodesulphurised thermal cracker
distillate stocks. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C11 to
C25 and boiling in the range of from
approximately 205°C to 400°C.)

Gas oils (petroleum),                   649-444-00-2         295-411-7    92045-29-9
thermal-cracked, hydrodesulphurised;
Cracked gas oil

Residues (petroleum), hydrogenated      649-445-00-8         295-514-7    92062-00-5
steam-cracked naphtha; Cracked gas
oil



(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a residual
fraction from the distillation of
hydrotreated steam-cracked naphtha.
It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons boiling in the range of
approximately 200°C to 350°C.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/717


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Residues (petroleum), steam-cracked        649-446-00-3        295-517-3    92062-04-9
naphtha distillation; Cracked gas oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a column
bottom from the separation of
effluents from steam cracking
naphtha at a high temperature. It boils
in the range of approximately 147°C
to 300°C and produces a finished oil
having a viscosity of 18 10-6 m².s-1 at
50°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), light catalytic   649-447-00-9        295-991-1    92201-60-0
cracked, thermally degraded; Cracked
gas oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by the
distillation of products from a
catalytic cracking process which has
been used as a heat transfer fluid. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons boiling in the range of
approximately 190°C to 340°C. This
steam is likely to contain organic
sulphur compounds.)

Residues (petroleum), steam-cracked,       649-448-00-4        297-905-8    93763-85-0
heat-soaked naphtha; Cracked gas oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as residue
from the distillation of steam-cracked
heat-soaked naphtha and boiling in
the range of approximately 150°C to
350°C.)
L 396/718       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Gas oils (petroleum), light vacuum,      649-450-00-5         308-278-8    97926-59-5
thermal-cracked hydrodesulphurised;
Cracked gas oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by catalytic
dehydrosulphurisation of
thermal-cracked light vacuum
petroleum. It consists predominantly
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C14 through C20 and boiling in the
range of approximately 270°C to
370°C.)

Distillates (petroleum),                 649-451-00-0         309-865-1    101316-59-0
hydrodesulphurised middle coker;
Cracked gas oil

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons by fractionation from
hydrodesulphurised coker distillate
stocks. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C12
through C21 and boiling in the range
of approximately 200°C to 360°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), heavy           649-452-00-6         309-939-3    101631-14-5
steam-cracked; Cracked gas oil
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/719


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by distillation
of steam cracking heavy residues. It
consists predominantly of highly
alkylated heavy aromatic
hydrocarbons boiling in the range of
approximately 250°C to 400°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), heavy             649-453-00-1         265-077-7    64741-76-0   L
hydrocracked; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the distillation of
the products from a hydrocracking
process. It consists predominantly of
saturated hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C15 through
C39 and boiling in the range of
approximately 260°C to 600°C.)

Distillates (petroleum),                   649-454-00-7         265-090-8    64741-88-4   L
solvent-refined heavy paraffinic;
Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the raffinate
from a solvent extraction process. It
consists predominantly of saturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity of at least 19 10-6
m².s-1 at 40°C.)

Distillates (petroleum),                   649-455-00-2         265-091-3    64741-89-5   L
solvent-refined light paraffinic;
Base oil – unspecified
L 396/720       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the raffinate
from a solvent extraction process. It
consists predominantly of saturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C15
through C30 and produces a finished
oil having a viscosity of less than
19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C.)

Residual oils (petroleum), solvent        649-456-00-8        265-096-0    64741-95-3   L
deasphalted; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the solvent
soluble fraction from C3-C4 solvent
deasphalting of a residuum. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly higher than
C25 and boiling above approximately
400°C.)

Distillates (petroleum),                  649-457-00-3        265-097-6    64741-96-4   L
solvent-refined heavy naphthenic;
Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the raffinate
from a solvent extraction process. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C20 through C50 and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of at least 19 10-6 m².s-1 at
40°C. It contains relatively few
normal paraffins.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/721


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum),                   649-458-00-9         265-098-1    64741-97-5   L
solvent-refined light naphthenic;
Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the raffinate
from a solvent extraction process. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C15 through C30 and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of less than 19 10-6 m².s-1 at
40°C. It contains relatively few
normal paraffins.)

Residual oils (petroleum),                 649-459-00-4         265-101-6    64742-01-4   L
solvent-refined; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the solvent
insoluble fraction from solvent
refining of a residuum using a polar
organic solvent such as phenol or
furfural. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C25 and
boiling above approximately 400°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), clay-treated      649-460-00-X         265-137-2    64742-36-5   L
paraffinic; Base oil – unspecified
L 396/722        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons resulting from
treatment of a petroleum fraction with
natural or modified clay in either a
contacting or percolation process to
remove the trace amounts of polar
compounds and impurities present. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C20 through C50 and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of at least 19 10-6 m².s-1 at
40°C. It contains a relatively large
proportion of saturated
hydrocarbons.)

Distillates (petroleum), clay-treated      649-461-00-5        265-138-8    64742-37-6   L
light paraffinic; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons resulting from
treatment of a petroleum fraction with
natural or modified clay in either a
contacting or percolation process to
remove the trace amounts of polar
compounds and impurities present. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C15 through C30 and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of less than 19 10-6 m².s-1 at
40°C. It contains a relatively large
proportion of saturated
hydrocarbons.)
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/723


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Residual oils (petroleum),                649-462-00-0         265-143-5    64742-41-2   L
clay-treated; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of a residual oil with a
natural or modified clay in either a
contacting or percolation process to
remove the trace amounts of polar
compounds and impurities present. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly
greater than C25 and boiling above
approximately 400°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), clay-treated     649-463-00-6         265-146-1    64742-44-5   L
heavy naphthenic; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons resulting from
treatment of a petroleum fraction with
a natural or modified clay in either a
contacting or percolation process to
remove the trace amounts of polar
compounds and impurities present. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C20 through C50 and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of at least 19 10-6 m².s-1 at
40°C. It contains relatively few
normal paraffins.)

Distillates (petroleum), clay-treated     649-464-00-1         265-147-7    64742-45-6   L
light naphthenic; Base oil –
unspecified
L 396/724        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons resulting from
treatment of a petroleum fraction with
natural or modified clay in either a
contacting or percolation process to
remove the trace amounts of polar
compounds and impurities present. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C15 through C30 and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of less than 19 10-6 m².s-1 at
40°C. It contains relatively few
normal paraffins.)

Distillates (petroleum), hydrotreated       649-465-00-7        265-155-0    64742-52-5   L
heavy naphthenic; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
petroleum fraction with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C20 through C50 and produces a
finished oil with a viscosity of at least
19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C. It contains
relatively few normal paraffins.)

Distillates (petroleum), hydrotreated       649-466-00-2        265-156-6    64742-53-6   L
light naphthenic; Base oil –
unspecified
30.12.2006        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/725


               Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
petroleum fraction with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C15 through C30 and produces a
finished oil with a viscosity of less
than 19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C. It contains
relatively few normal paraffins.)

Distillates (petroleum), hydrotreated        649-467-00-8        265-157-1    64742-54-7   L
heavy paraffinic; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
petroleum fraction with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C20 through C50 and produces a
finished oil of at least 19 10-6 m².s-1 at
40°C. It contains a relatively large
proportion of saturated
hydrocarbons.)

Distillates (petroleum), hydrotreated        649-468-00-3        265-158-7    64742-55-8   L
light paraffinic; Base oil –
unspecified
L 396/726        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
petroleum fraction with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C15 through C30 and produces a
finished oil with a viscosity of less
than 19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C. It contains
a relatively large proportion of
saturated hydrocarbons.)

Distillates (petroleum),                   649-469-00-9         265-159-2    64742-56-9   L
solvent-dewaxed light paraffinic;
Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by removal of
normal paraffins from a petroleum
fraction by solvent crystallisation. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C15
through C30 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity of less than
19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C.)

Residual oils (petroleum),                 649-470-00-4         265-160-8    64742-57-0   L
hydrotreated; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
petroleum fraction with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly greater than
C25 and boiling above approximately
400°C.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/727


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Residual oils (petroleum),                 649-471-00-X        265-166-0    64742-62-7   L
solvent-dewaxed; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by removal of
long, branched chain hydrocarbons
from a residual oil by solvent
crystallisation. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly greater than C25 and
boiling above approximately 400°C.)

Distillates (petroleum),                   649-472-00-5        265-167-6    64742-63-8   L
solvent-dewaxed heavy naphthenic;
Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by removal of
normal paraffins from a petroleum
fraction by solvent crystallisation. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C20 through C50 and
produces a finished oil of not less
than 19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C. It contains
relatively few normal paraffins.)

Distillates (petroleum),                   649-473-00-0        265-168-1    64742-64-9   L
solvent-dewaxed light naphthenic;
Base oil – unspecified
L 396/728        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by removal of
normal paraffins from a petroleum
fraction by solvent crystallisation. It
consists of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers predominantly in the
range of C15 through C30 and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of less than 19 10-6 m².s-1 at
40°C. It contains relatively few
normal paraffins.)

Distillates (petroleum),                   649-474-00-6         265-169-7    64742-65-0   L
solvent-dewaxed heavy paraffinic;
Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by removal of
normal paraffins from a petroleum
fraction by solvent crystallisation. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity of not less than
19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C.)

Naphthenic oils (petroleum), catalytic     649-475-00-1         265-172-3    64742-68-3   L
dewaxed heavy; Base oil –
unspecified
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/729


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
catalytic dewaxing process. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity of at least
19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C. It contains
relatively few normal paraffins.)

Naphthenic oils (petroleum), catalytic     649-476-00-7        265-173-9    64742-69-4   L
dewaxed light; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
catalytic dewaxing process. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C15 through C30 and produces a
finished oil with a viscosity of less
than 19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C. It contains
relatively few normal paraffins.)

Paraffin oils (petroleum), catalytic       649-477-00-2        265-174-4    64742-70-7   L
dewaxed heavy; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
catalytic dewaxing process. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity of at least 19 10-6
m².s-1 at 40°C.)
L 396/730       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Paraffin oils (petroleum), catalytic      649-478-00-8        265-176-5    64742-71-8   L
dewaxed light; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
catalytic dewaxing process. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C15
through C30 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity of less than
19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C.)

Naphthenic oils (petroleum), complex      649-479-00-3        265-179-1    64742-75-2   L
dewaxed heavy; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by removing
straight chain paraffin hydrocarbons
as a solid by treatment with an agent
such as urea. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity of at least
19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C. It contains
relatively few normal paraffins.)

Naphthenic oils (petroleum), complex      649-480-00-9        265-180-7    64742-76-3   L
dewaxed light; Base oil – unspecified
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/731


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
catalytic dewaxing process. It consists
of hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C15 through C30 and produces a
finished oil having a viscosity less
than 19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C. It contains
relatively few normal paraffins.)

Lubricating oils (petroleum), C20-50,      649-481-00-4        276-736-3    72623-85-9   L
hydrotreated neutral oil-based
high-viscosity; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating
light vacuum gas oil, heavy vacuum
gas oil, and solvent deasphalted
residual oil with hydrogen in the
presence of a catalyst in a two stage
process with dewaxing being carried
out between the two stages. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50 and produces a finished
oil having a viscosity of
approximately 112 10-6 m².s-1 at
40°C. It contains a relatively large
proportion of saturated
hydrocarbons.)

Lubricating oils (petroleum), C15-30,      649-482-00-X        276-737-9    72623-86-0   L
hydrotreated neutral oil-based; Base
oil – unspecified
L 396/732       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating
light vacuum gas oil and heavy
vacuum gas oil with hydrogen in the
presence of a catalyst in a two stage
process with dewaxing being carried
out between the two stages. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C15
through C30 and produces a finished
oil having a viscosity of
approximately 15 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C.
It contains a relatively large
proportion of saturated
hydrocarbons.)

Lubricating oils (petroleum), C20-50,     649-483-00-5        276-738-4    72623-87-1   L
hydrotreated neutral oil-based; Base
oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating
light vacuum gas oil, heavy vacuum
gas oil and solvent deasphalted
residual oil with hydrogen in the
presence of a catalyst in a two stage
process with dewaxing being carried
out between the two stages. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity of approximately
32 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C. It contains a
relatively large proportion of
saturated hydrocarbons.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/733


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Lubricating oils; Base oil –               649-484-00-0         278-012-2    74869-22-0   L
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from solvent
extraction and dewaxing processes. It
consists predominantly of saturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C15 through C50.)

Distillates (petroleum), complex           649-485-00-6         292-613-7    90640-91-8   L
dewaxed heavy paraffinic; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by dewaxing
heavy paraffinic distillate. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity of equal to or
greater than 19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C. It
contains relatively few normal
paraffins.)
L 396/734        EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


               Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), complex            649-486-00-1         292-614-2    90640-92-9   L
dewaxed light paraffinic; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by dewaxing
light paraffinic distillate. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C12
through C30 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity of less than
19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C. It contains
relatively few normal paraffins.)

Distillates (petroleum),                    649-487-00-7         292-616-3    90640-94-1   L
solvent-dewaxed heavy paraffinic,
clay-treated; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating
dewaxed heavy paraffinic distillate
with neutral or modified clay in either
a contacting or percolation process. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/735


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Hydrocarbons, C20-50,                    649-488-00-2         292-617-9    90640-95-2   L
solvent-dewaxed heavy paraffinic,
hydrotreated; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by treating
dewaxed heavy paraffinic distillate
with hydrogen in the presence of a
catalyst. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50.)

Distillates (petroleum), solvent        649-489-00-8          292-618-4    90640-96-3   L
dewaxed light paraffinic, clay-treated;
Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons resulting from
treatment of dewaxed light paraffinic
distillate with natural or modified
clay in either a contacting or
percolation process. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C15
through C30.)
L 396/736       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), solvent         649-490-00-3         292-620-5    90640-97-4   L
dewaxed light paraffinic,
hydrotreated; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by treating a
dewaxed light paraffinic distillate
with hydrogen in the presence of a
catalyst. It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C15
through C30.)

Residual oils (petroleum),               649-491-00-9         292-656-1    90669-74-2   L
hydrotreated solvent dewaxed; Base
oil – unspecified

Residual oils (petroleum), catalytic     649-492-00-4         294-843-3    91770-57-9   L
dewaxed; Base oil – unspecified

Distillates (petroleum), dewaxed         649-493-00-X         295-300-3    91995-39-0   L
heavy paraffinic, hydrotreated; Base
oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from an
intensive treatment of dewaxed
distillate by hydrogenation in the
presence of a catalyst. It consists
predominantly of saturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C25 through C39 and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of approximately
44 10-6 m².s-1 at 50°C.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/737


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum), dewaxed light   649-494-00-5        295-301-9    91995-40-3   L
paraffinic, hydrotreated; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from an
intensive treatment of dewaxed
distillate by hydrogenation in the
presence of a catalyst. It consists
predominantly of saturated
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
in the range of C21 through C29 and
produces a finished oil with a
viscosity of approximately
13 10-6 m².s-1 at 50°C.)

Distillates (petroleum), hydrocracked    649-495-00-0        295-306-6    91995-45-8   L
solvent-refined, dewaxed; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of liquid
hydrocarbons obtained by
recrystallisation of dewaxed
hydrocracked solvent-refined
petroleum distillates.)
L 396/738       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum),                  649-496-00-6         295-316-0    91995-54-9   L
solvent-refined light naphthenic,
hydrotreated; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
petroleum fraction with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst and
removing the aromatic hydrocarbons
by solvent extraction. It consists
predominantly of naphthenic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C15
through C30 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity of between
13-15 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C.)

Lubricating oils (petroleum) C17-35,      649-497-00-1         295-423-2    92045-42-6   L
solvent-extd., dewaxed, hydrotreated;
Base oil – unspecified

Lubricating oils (petroleum),             649-498-00-7         295-424-8    92045-43-7   L
hydrocracked nonarom.
solvent-deparaffined; Base oil –
unspecified

Residual oils (petroleum),                649-499-00-2         295-499-7    92061-86-4   L
hydrocracked acid-treated
solvent-dewaxed; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by solvent
removal of paraffins from the residue
of the distillation of acid-treated,
hydrocracked heavy paraffins and
boiling approximately above 380°C.)
30.12.2006       EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/739


              Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Paraffin oils (petroleum), solvent-         649-500-00-6         295-810-6    92129-09-4   L
refined dewaxed heavy; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from sulphur-
containing paraffinic crude oil. It
consists predominantly of a solvent
refined deparaffinated lubricating oil
with a viscosity of 65 10-6 m².s-1 at
50°C.)

Lubricating oils (petroleum), base          649-501-00-1         297-474-6    93572-43-1   L
oils, paraffinic; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by refining
crude oil. It consists predominantly of
aromatics, naphthenics and
paraffinics and produces a finished oil
with a viscosity of 23 10-6 m².s-1 at
40°C.)

Hydrocarbons, hydrocracked                  649-502-00-7         297-857-8    93763-38-3   L
paraffinic distillation residues,
solvent-dewaxed; Base oil –
unspecified

Hydrocarbons, C20-50, residual oil          649-503-00-2         300-257-1    93924-61-9   L
hydrogenation vacuum distillate;
Base oil – unspecified

Distillates (petroleum),                    649-504-00-8         305-588-5    94733-08-1   L
solvent-refined hydrotreated heavy;
hydrogenated; Base oil – unspecified
L 396/740       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Distillates (petroleum),                  649-505-00-3         305-589-0    94733-09-2   L
solvent-refined hydrocracked light;
Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by solvent
dearomatisation of the residue of
hydrocracked petroleum. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C18
through C27 and boiling in the range
of approximately 370°C to 450°C.)

Lubricating oils (petroleum), C18-40,     649-506-00-9         305-594-8    94733-15-0   L
solvent-dewaxed hydrocracked
distillate-based; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by solvent
deparaffination of the distillation
residue from hydrocracked petroleum.
It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C18
through C40 and boiling in the range
of approximately 370°C to 550°C.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/741


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Lubricating oils (petroleum), C18-40,      649-507-00-4         305-595-3    94733-16-1   L
solvent-dewaxed hydrogenated
raffinate-based; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by solvent
deparaffination of the hydrogenated
raffinate obtained by solvent
extraction of a hydrotreated
petroleum distillate. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C18
through C40 and boiling in the range
of approximately 370°C to 550°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C13-30, arom.-rich,          649-508-00-X         305-971-7    95371-04-3   L
solvent-extd. naphthenic distillate;
Base oil – unspecified

Hydrocarbons, C16-32, arom.-rich,          649-509-00-5         305-972-2    95371-05-4   L
solvent-extd. naphthenic distillate;
Base oil – unspecified

Hydrocarbons, C37-68, dewaxed              649-510-00-0         305-974-3    95371-07-6   L
deasphalted hydrotreated vacuum
distillation residues; Base oil –
unspecified

Hydrocarbons, C37-65, hydrotreated         649-511-00-6         305-975-9    95371-08-7   L
deasphalted vacuum distillation
residues; Base oil – unspecified

Distillates (petroleum), hydrocracked      649-512-00-1         307-010-7    97488-73-8   L
solvent-refined light; Base oil –
unspecified
L 396/742        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the solvent
treatment of a distillate from
hydrocracked petroleum distillates. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C18
through C27 and boiling in the range
of approximately 370°C to 450°C.)

Distillates (petroleum),                   649-513-00-7         307-011-2    97488-74-9   L
solvent-refined hydrogenated heavy;
Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of a hydrogenated
petroleum distillate with a solvent. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C19
through C40 and boiling in the range
of approximately 390°C to 550°C.)

Lubricating oils (petroleum) C18-27,       649-514-00-2         307-034-8    97488-95-4   L
hydrocracked solvent-dewaxed; Base
oil – unspecified

Hydrocarbons, C17-30, hydrotreated         649-515-00-8         307-661-7    97675-87-1   L
solvent-deasphalted atm. distillation
residue, distillation lights; Base oil –
unspecified
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/743


              Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as first
runnings from the vacuum distillation
of effluents from the treatment of a
solvent deasphalted short residue with
hydrogen in the presence of a
catalyst. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C17
through C30 and boiling in the range
of approximately 300°C to 400°C. It
produces a finished oil having a
viscosity of 4 10-6 m².s-1 at
approximately 100°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C17-40, hydrotreated       649-516-00-3         307-755-8    97722-06-0   L
solvent-deasphalted distillation
residue, vacuum distillation lights;
Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as first
runnings from the vacuum distillation
of effluents from the catalytic
hydrotreatment of a solvent
deasphalted short residue having a
viscosity of 8 10-6 m².s-1 at
approximately 100°C. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C17
through C40 and boiling in the range
of approximately 300°C to 500°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C13-27, solvent-extd.      649-517-00-9         307-758-4    97722-09-3   L
light naphthenic; Base oil –
unspecified
L 396/744         EN                  Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


               Substances                     Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by extraction
of the aromatics from a light
naphthenic distillate having a
viscosity of 9.5 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C13
through C27 and boiling in the range
of approximately 240°C to 400°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C14-29, solvent-extd.          649-518-00-4         307-760-5    97722-10-6   L
light naphthenic; Base oil –
unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by extraction
of the aromatics from a light
naphthenic distillate having a
viscosity of 16 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C14
through C29 and boiling in the range
of approximately 250°C to 425°C.)

Hydrocarbons, C27-42, dearomatised;          649-519-00-X         308-131-8    97862-81-2   L
Base oil – unspecified

Hydrocarbons, C17-30, hydrotreated           649-520-00-5         308-132-3    97862-82-3   L
distillates, distillation lights; Base oil
– unspecified

Hydrocarbons, C27-45, naphthenic             649-521-00-0         308-133-9    97862-83-4   L
vacuum distillation; Base oil –
unspecified
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/745


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Hydrocarbons, C27-45, dearomatised;       649-522-00-6         308-287-7    97926-68-6    L
Base oil – unspecified

Hydrocarbons, C20-58, hydrotreated;       649-523-00-1         308-289-8    97926-70-0    L
Base oil – unspecified

Hydrocarbons, C27-42, naphthenic;         649-524-00-7         308-290-3    97926-71-1    L
Base oil – unspecified

Residual oils (petroleum),           649-525-00-2              309-710-8    100684-37-5   L
carbon-treated solvent-dewaxed; Base
oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by the
treatment of solvent-dewaxed
petroleum residual oils with activated
charcoal for the removal of trace
polar constituents and impurities.)

Residual oils (petroleum),                649-526-00-8         309-711-3    100684-38-6   L
clay-treated solvent-dewaxed; Base
oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treatment
of solvent-dewaxed petroleum
residual oils with bleaching earth for
the removal of trace polar
constituents and impurities.)
L 396/746        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Lubricating oils (petroleum) C25,          649-527-00-3        309-874-0    101316-69-2   L
solvent-extd., deasphalted, dewaxed,
hydrogenated; base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by solvent
extraction and hydrogenation of
vacuum distillation residues. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of greater
than C25 and produces a finished oil
with a viscosity in the order of 32 10-6
m².s-1 to 37 10-6 m².s-1 at 100°C.)

Lubricating oils (petroleum) C17-32,       649-528-00-9        309-875-6    101316-70-5   L
solvent-extd., dewaxed,
hydrogenated; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by solvent
extraction and hydrogenation of
atmospheric distillation residues. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C17
through C32 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity in the order
17 10-6 m².s-1 to 23 10-6 m².s-1 at
40°C.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/747


             Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

Lubricating oils (petroleum) C20-35,    649-529-00-4         309-876-1    101316-71-6   L
solvent-extd., dewaxed,
hydrogenated; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by solvent
extraction and hydrogenation of
atmospheric distillation residues. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C35 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity in the order of
37 10-6 m².s-1 to 44 10-6 m².s-1 at
40°C.)

Lubricating oils (petroleum) C24-50,    649-530-00-X         309-877-7    101316-72-7   L
solvent-extd., dewaxed,
hydrogenated; Base oil – unspecified

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by solvent
extraction and hydrogenation of
atmospheric distillation residues. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C24
through C50 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity in the order of
16 10-6 m².s-1 to 75 10-6 m².s-1 at
40°C.)
L 396/748       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Extracts (petroleum), heavy               649-531-00-5         272-175-3    68783-00-6   L
naphthenic distillate solvent, arom.
conc.; Distillate aromatic extract
(treated)

(An aromatic concentrate produced
by adding water to heavy naphthenic
distillate solvent extract and
extraction solvent.)

Extracts (petroleum), solvent-refined     649-532-00-0         272-180-0    68783-04-0   L
heavy paraffinic distillate solvent;
Distillate aromatic extract (treated)

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the extract
from the re-extraction of solvent-
refined heavy paraffinic distillate. It
consists of saturated and aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50.)

Extracts (petroleum), heavy paraffinic 649-533-00-6            272-342-0    68814-89-1   L
distillates, solvent-deasphalted;
Distillate aromatic extract (treated)

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the extract
from a solvent extraction of heavy
paraffinic distillate.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/749


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Extracts (petroleum), heavy                649-534-00-1         292-631-5    90641-07-9   L
naphthenic distillate solvent,
hydrotreated; Distillate aromatic
extract (treated)

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating a
heavy naphthenic distillate solvent
extract with hydrogen in the presence
of a catalyst. It consists
predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50 and produces a finished
oil of at least 19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C.)

Extracts (petroleum), heavy paraffinic 649-535-00-7             292-632-0    90641-08-0   L
distillate solvent, hydrotreated;
Distillate aromatic extract (treated)

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by treating a
heavy paraffinic distillate solvent
extract with hydrogen in the presence
of a catalyst. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C21
through C33 and boiling in the range
of approximately 350°C to 480°C.)
L 396/750        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

Extracts (petroleum), light paraffinic     649-536-00-2        292-633-6    90641-09-1   L
distillate solvent, hydrotreated;
Distillate aromatic extract (treated)

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by treating a
light paraffinic distillate solvent
extract with hydrogen in the presence
of a catalyst. It consists
predominantly of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C17
through C26 and boiling in the range
of approximately 280°C to 400°C.)

Extracts (petroleum), hydrotreated         649-537-00-8        295-335-4    91995-73-2   L
paraffinic light distillate solvent;
Distillate aromatic extract (treated)

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the extract
from solvent extraction of
intermediate paraffinic top solvent
distillate that is treated with hydrogen
in the presence of a catalyst. It
consists predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C16
through C36.)

Extracts (petroleum), light naphthenic 649-538-00-3            295-338-0    91995-75-4   L
distillate solvent, hydrodesulphurised;
Distillate aromatic extract (treated)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/751


              Substances                  Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by treating the
extract, obtained from a solvent
extraction process, with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst under
conditions primarily to remove
sulphur compounds. It consists
predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C15
through C30. This stream is likely to
contain 5 wt. % or more of 4- to
6-membered condensed ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Extracts (petroleum), light paraffinic   649-539-00-9         295-339-6    91995-76-5   L
distillate solvent, acid-treated;
Distillate aromatic extract (treated)

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a fraction
of the distillation of an extract from
the solvent extraction of light
paraffinic top petroleum distillates
that is subjected to a sulphuric acid
refining. It consists predominantly of
aromatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C16 through C32.)

Extracts (petroleum), light paraffinic  649-540-00-4          295-340-1    91995-77-6   L
distillate solvent, hydrodesulphurised;
Distillate aromatic extract (treated)
L 396/752        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by solvent
extraction of a light paraffin distillate
and treated with hydrogen to convert
the organic sulphur to hydrogen
sulphide which is eliminated. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C15
through C40 and produces a finished
oil having a viscosity of greater than
10-5 m².s-1 at 40°C.)

Extracts (petroleum), light vacuum          649-541-00-X        295-342-2    91995-79-8   L
gas oil solvent, hydrotreated;
Distillate aromatic extract (treated)

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by solvent
extraction from light vacuum
petroleum gas oils and treated with
hydrogen in the presence of a
catalyst. It consists predominantly of
aromatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C13 through C30.)

Extracts (petroleum), heavy paraffinic 649-542-00-5             296-437-1    92704-08-0   L
distillate solvent, clay-treated;
Distillate aromatic extract (treated)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                L 396/753


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons resulting from
treatment of a petroleum fraction with
natural or modified clay in either a
contact or percolation process to
remove the trace amounts of polar
compounds and impurities present. It
consists predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50. This stream is likely to
contain 5 wt. % or more 4-6
membered ring aromatic
hydrocarbons.)

Extracts (petroleum), heavy                649-543-00-0        297-827-4    93763-10-1   L
naphthenic distillate solvent,
hydrodesulphurised; Distillate
aromatic extract (treated)

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a
petroleum stock by treating with
hydrogen to convert organic sulphur
to hydrogen sulphide which is
removed. It consists predominantly of
aromatic hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in the range
of C15 through C50 and produces a
finished oil with a viscosity of greater
than 19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C.)

Extracts (petroleum),                   649-544-00-6           297-829-5    93763-11-2   L
solvent-dewaxed heavy paraffinic
distillate solvent, hydrodesulphurised;
Distillate aromatic extract (treated)
L 396/754        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                 30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from a solvent
dewaxed petroleum stock by treating
with hydrogen to convert organic
sulphur to hydrogen sulphide which is
removed. It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C15
through C50 and produces a finished
oil with a viscosity of greater than
19 10-6 m².s-1 at 40°C.)

Extracts (petroleum), light paraffinic     649-545-00-1        309-672-2    100684-02-4   L
distillate solvent, carbon-treated;
Distillate aromatic extract (treated)

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a fraction
from distillation of an extract
recovered by solvent extraction of
light paraffinic top petroleum
distillate treated with activated
charcoal to remove traces of polar
constituents and impurities. It consists
predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C16
through C32.)

Extracts (petroleum), light paraffinic     649-546-00-7        309-673-8    100684-03-5   L
distillate solvent, clay-treated;
Distillate aromatic extract (treated)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                 L 396/755


              Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number    Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as a fraction
from distillation of an extract
recovered by solvent extraction of
light paraffinic top petroleum
distillates treated with bleaching earth
to remove traces of polar constituents
and impurities. It consists
predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C16
through C32.)

Extracts (petroleum), light vacuum,         649-547-00-2        309-674-3    100684-04-6   L
gas oil solvent, carbon-treated;
Distillate aromatic extract (treated)

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by solvent
extraction of light vacuum petroleum
gas oil treated with activated charcoal
for the removal of trace polar
constituents and impurities. It consists
predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C13
through C30.)

Extracts (petroleum), light vacuum,         649-548-00-8        309-675-9    100684-05-7   L
gas oil solvent, clay-treated; Distillate
aromatic extract (treated)
L 396/756       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                30.12.2006


             Substances                    Index number         EC number   CAS number   Notes

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by solvent
extraction of light vacuum petroleum
gas oils treated with bleaching earth
for removal of trace polar constituents
and impurities. It consists
predominantly of aromatic
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C13
through C30.)

Foots oil (petroleum); Foots oil          649-549-00-3         265-171-8    64742-67-2   L

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained as the oil
fraction from a solvent deoiling or a
wax sweating process. It consists
predominantly of branched chain
hydrocarbons having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range of C20
through C50.)

Foots oil (petroleum), hydrotreated;      649-550-00-9         295-394-6    92045-12-0   L
Foots oil

Refractory ceramic fibres; Special        650-017-00-8                                   R
Purpose Fibres, with the exception of
those specified elsewhere in Annex I
to Directive 67/548/EEC; [Man-made
vitreous (silicate) fibres with random
orientation with alkaline oxide and
alkali earth oxide
(Na2O + K2O + CaO + MgO + BaO)
content less or equal to 18 % by
weight]
30.12.2006   EN   Official Journal of the European Union   L 396/757


                             Appendix 3

                  Point 29 – Mutagens: category 1
L 396/758         EN        Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


                                        Appendix 4

                            Point 29 – Mutagens: category 2

            Substances     Index number          EC number            CAS number   Notes

Hexamethylphosphoric      015-106-00-2         211-653-8             680-31-9
triamide;
hexamethylphosphoramide

Diethyl sulphate          016-027-00-6         200-589-6             64-67-5

Chromium (VI) trioxide    024-001-00-0         215-607-8             1333-82-0     E

Potassium dichromate      024-002-00-6         231-906-6             7778-50-9     E

Ammonium dichromate       024-003-00-1         232-143-1             7789-09-5     E

Sodium dichromate         024-004-00-7         234-190-3             10588-01-9    E
anhydrate

Sodium dichromate,        024-004-01-4         234-190-3             7789-12-0     E
dihydrate

Chromyl dichloride;       024-005-00-2         239-056-8             14977-61-8
chromic oxychloride

Potassium chromate        024-006-00-8         232-140-5             7789-00-6

Sodium chromate           024-018-00-3         231-889-5             7775-11-3     E

Cadmium fluoride          048-006-00-2         232-222-0             7790-79-6     E
30.12.2006       EN            Official Journal of the European Union                         L 396/759


          Substances          Index number          EC number            CAS number     Notes

Cadmium chloride             048-008-00-3         233-296-7             10108-64-2     E

Cadmium sulphate             048-009-00-9         233-331-6             10124-36-4     E

Butane [containing ≥ 0,1 %   601-004-01-8         203-448-7 [1]         106-97-8 [1]   C, S
Butadiene (203-450-8)] [1]

Isobutane [containing                             20-857-2 [2]          75-28-5 [2]
≥ 0,1 % Butadiene (203-
450-8)] [2]

1,3-Butadiene buta-1,3-      601-013-00-X         203-450-8             106-99-0       D
diene

Benzene                      601-020-00-8         200-753-7             71-43-2        E

Benzo[a]pyrene;              601-032-00-3         200-028-5             50-32-8
benzo[d,e,f]chrysene

1,2-Dibromo-3-               602-021-00-6         202-479-3             96-12-8
chloropropane

Ethylene oxide; oxirane      603-023-00-X         200-849-9             75-21-8

Propylene oxide; 1,2-        603-055-00-4         200-879-2             75-56-9        E
epoxypropane;
Methyloxirane

2,2'-Bioxirane; 1,2:3,4-     603-060-00-1         215-979-1             1464-53-5
diepoxybutane
L 396/760         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Methyl                          607-190-00-X         401-890-7             77402-03-0
acrylamidomethoxyacetate
(containing ≥ 0,1 %
acrylamide)

Methyl acrylamidoglycolate      607-210-00-7         403-230-3             77402-05-2
(containing ≥ 0,1 %
acrylamide)

2-Nitrotoluene                  609-065-00-5         201-853-3             88-72-2        E

4,4'-oxydianiline [1] and its   612-199-00-7         202-977-0 [1]         101-80-4 [1]   E
salts

p-aminophenyl ether [1]

Ethyleneimine; aziridine        613-001-00-1         205-793-9             151-56-4

Carbendazim (ISO)               613-048-00-8         234-232-0             10605-21-7

methyl benzimidazol-2-
ylcarbamate

Benomyl (ISO)                   613-049-00-3         241-775-7             17804-35-2

methyl 1-
(butylcarbamoyl)benzimida
zol-2-ylcarbamate
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/761


         Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

1,3,5,-Tris(oxiranylmethyl)-   615-021-00-6         219-514-3             2451-62-9
1,3,5-triazine-
2,4,6(1H,3H,5H)-trione;
TGIC

Acrylamide                     616-003-00-0         201-173-7             79-06-1

1,3,5-tris-[(2S and 2R)-2,3- 616-091-00-0           423-400-0             59653-74-6    E
epoxypropyl]-1,3,5-triazine-
2,4,6-(1H,3H,5H)-trione

Gases (petroleum), catalytic   649-062-00-6         270-755-0             68477-73-6    H, K
cracked naphtha
depropaniser overhead, C3-
rich acid-free; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of catalytic
cracked hydrocarbons and
treated to remove acidic
impurities. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C2
through C4, predominantly
C3.)
L 396/762         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), catalytic    649-063-00-1         270-756-6             68477-74-7    H, K
cracker; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the distillation of the
products from a catalytic
cracking process. It consists
predominantly of aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic    649-064-00-7         270-757-1             68477-75-8    H, K
cracker, C1-5-rich;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the distillation of products
from a catalytic cracking
process. It consists of
aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in
the range of C1 through C6,
predominantly C1 through
C5.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/763


         Substances              Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), catalytic    649-065-00-2         270-758-7             68477-76-9    H, K
polymd. naphtha stabiliser
overhead, C2-4-rich;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the fractionation
stabilisation of catalytic
polymerised naphtha. It
consists of aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C2
through C6, predominantly
C2 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic    649-066-00-8         270-760-8             68477-79-2    H, K
reformer, C1-4-rich;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
distillation of products from
a catalytic reforming
process. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C1
through C6, predominantly
C1 through C4.)
L 396/764         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), C3-5         649-067-00-3         270-765-5             68477-83-8    H, K
olefinic-paraffinic
alkylation feed; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
olefinic and paraffinic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C3
through C5 which are used
as alkylation feed. Ambient
temperatures normally
exceed the critical
temperature of these
combinations.)

Gases (petroleum), C4-rich;     649-068-00-9         270-767-6             68477-85-0    H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
distillation of products from
a catalytic fractionation
process. It consists of
aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in
the range of C3 through C5,
predominantly C4.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/765


         Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum),             649-069-00-4         270-768-1             68477-86-1    H, K
deethaniser overheads;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced
from distillation of the gas
and gasoline fractions from
the catalytic cracking
process. It contains
predominantly ethane and
ethylene.)

Gases (petroleum),             649-070-00-X         270-769-7             68477-87-2    H, K
deisobutaniser tower
overheads; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the atmospheric distillation
of a butane-butylene stream.
It consists of aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C3 through C4.)
L 396/766         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum),              649-071-00-5         270-772-3             68477-90-7    H, K
depropaniser dry, propene-
rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the distillation of products
from the gas and gasoline
fractions of a catalytic
cracking process. It consists
predominantly of propylene
with some ethane and
propane.)

Gases (petroleum),              649-072-00-0         270-773-9             68477-91-8    H, K
depropaniser overheads;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
distillation of products from
the gas and gasoline
fractions of a catalytic
cracking process. It consists
of aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C2 through C4.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/767


         Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), gas         649-073-00-6         270-777-0             68477-94-1    H, K
recovery plant depropaniser
overheads; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
fractionation of
miscellaneous hydrocarbon
streams. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C1
through C4, predominantly
propane.)

Gases (petroleum), Girbatol    649-074-00-1         270-778-6             68477-95-2    H, K
unit feed; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons that is used as
the feed into the Girbatol
unit to remove hydrogen
sulfide. It consists of
aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C2 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum),             649-075-00-7         270-782-8             68477-99-6    H, K
isomerised naphtha
fractionator, C4-rich,
hydrogen sulfide-free;
Petroleum gas
L 396/768         EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances            Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),            649-076-00-2         270-802-5             68478-21-7    H, K
catalytic cracked clarified
oil and thermal cracked
vacuum residue
fractionation reflux drum;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of catalytic
cracked clarified oil and
thermal cracked vacuum
residue. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C6.)

Tail gas (petroleum),            649-077-00-8         270-803-0             68478-22-8    H, K
catalytic cracked naphtha
stabilisation absorber;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the stabilisation of catalytic
cracked naphtha. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C6.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/769


         Substances               Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),            649-078-00-3         270-804-6             68478-24-0    H, K
catalytic cracker, catalytic
reformer and
hydrodesulphuriser
combined fractionater;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the fractionation of products
from catalytic cracking,
catalytic reforming and
hydrodesulphurising
processes treated to remove
acidic impurities. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C5.)
L 396/770         EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),             649-079-00-9         270-806-7             68478-26-2    H, K
catalytic reformed naphtha
fractionation stabiliser;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the fractionation
stabilisation of catalytic
reformed naphtha. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum),             649-080-00-4         270-813-5             68478-32-0    H, K
saturate gas plant mixed
stream, C4-rich; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the fractionation
stabilisation of straight-run
naphtha, distillation tail gas
and catalytic reformed
naphtha stabiliser tail gas. It
consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in
the range of C3 through C6,
predominantly butane and
isobutane.)
30.12.2006        EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/771


         Substances                 Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),              649-081-00-X         270-814-0             68478-33-1    H, K
saturate gas recovery plant,
C1-2-rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of distillate tail
gas, straight-run naphtha,
catalytic reformed naphtha
stabiliser tail gas. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C1
through C5, predominantly
methane and ethane.)

Tail gas (petroleum),              649-082-00-5         270-815-6             68478-34-2    H, K
vacuum residues thermal
cracker; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the thermal cracking of
vacuum residues. It consists
of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)
L 396/772         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Hydrocarbons, C3-4-rich,        649-083-00-0         270-990-9             68512-91-4    H, K
petroleum distillate;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
distillation and
condensation of crude oil. It
consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in
the range of C3 through C5,
predominantly C3 through
C4.)

Gases (petroleum),              649-084-00-6         271-000-8             68513-15-5    H, K
full-range straight-run
naphtha dehexaniser off;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
the fractionation of the
full-range straight-run
naphtha. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C2 through C6.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/773


         Substances              Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum),              649-085-00-1         271-001-3             68513-16-6    H, K
hydrocracking depropaniser
off, hydrocarbon-rich;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbon produced by
the distillation of products
from a hydrocracking
process. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C4.
It may also contain small
amounts of hydrogen and
hydrogen sulfide.)

Gases (petroleum), light        649-086-00-7         271-002-9             68513-17-7    H, K
straight-run naphtha
stabiliser off; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
the stabilisation of light
straight-run naphtha. It
consists of saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C2 through C6.)
L 396/774         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Residues (petroleum),           649-087-00-2         271-010-2             68513-66-6    H, K
alkylation splitter, C4-rich;
Petroleum gas

(A complex residuum from
the distillation of streams
from various refinery
operations. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C4
through C5, predominantly
butane, and boiling in the
range of approximately
−11,7 °C to 27,8 °C.)

Hydrocarbons, C1-4;             649-088-00-8         271-032-2             68514-31-8    H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons provided by
thermal cracking and
absorber operations and by
distillation of crude oil. It
consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4 and boiling
in the range of
approximately minus
164 °C to minus 0.5 °C.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/775


         Substances               Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Hydrocarbons, C1-4,              649-089-00-3         271-038-5             68514-36-3    H, K
sweetened; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
subjecting hydrocarbon
gases to a sweetening
process to convert
mercaptans or to remove
acidic impurities. It consists
of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4 and boiling
in the range of
approximately − 164 °C to
− 0,5 °C.)

Hydrocarbons, C1-3;              649-090-00-9         271-259-7             68527-16-2    H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C3
and boiling in the range of
approximately − 164 °C to
− 42 °C.)
L 396/776         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Hydrocarbons, C1-4,             649-091-00-4         271-261-8             68527-19-5    H, K
debutaniser fraction;
Petroleum gas

Gases (petroleum), C1-5,        649-092-00-X         271-624-0             68602-83-5    H, K
wet; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the distillation of crude oil
and/or the cracking of tower
gas oil. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C5.)

Hydrocarbons, C2-4;             649-093-00-5         271-734-9             68606-25-7    H, K
Petroleum gas

Hydrocarbons, C3;               649-094-00-0         271-735-4             68606-26-8    H, K
Petroleum gas

Gases (petroleum),              649-095-00-6         271-737-5             68606-27-9    H, K
alkylation feed; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the catalytic cracking of gas
oil. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C3 through C4.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/777


         Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum),             649-096-00-1         271-742-2             68606-34-8    H, K
depropaniser bottoms
fractionation off; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the fractionation of
depropaniser bottoms. It
consists predominantly of
butane, isobutane and
butadiene.)

Gases (petroleum), refinery    649-097-00-7         272-183-7             68783-07-3    H, K
blend; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination
obtained from various
processes. It consists of
hydrogen, hydrogen sulfide
and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)
L 396/778         EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances            Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), catalytic     649-098-00-2         272-203-4             68783-64-2    H, K
cracking; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the distillation of the
products from a catalytic
cracking process. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C3 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), C2-4,         649-099-00-8         272-205-5             68783-65-3    H, K
sweetened; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
subjecting a petroleum
distillate to a sweetening
process to convert
mercaptans or to remove
acidic impurities. It consists
predominantly of saturated
and unsaturated
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C2 through C4
and boiling in the range of
approximately − 51 °C to
− 34 °C.)
30.12.2006       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/779


         Substances              Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), crude oil 649-100-00-1            272-871-7             68918-99-0    H, K
fractionation off; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the fractionation of crude
oil. It consists of saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum),              649-101-00-7         272-872-2             68919-00-6    H, K
dehexaniser off; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
the fractionation of
combined naphtha streams.
It consists of saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)
L 396/780         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), light        649-102-00-2         272-878-5             68919-05-1    H, K
straight run gasoline
fractionation stabiliser off;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
the fractionation of light
straight-run gasoline. It
consists of saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), naphtha      649-103-00-8         272-879-0             68919-06-2    H, K
unifiner desulphurisation
stripper off; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by a
naphtha unifiner
desulphurisation process
and stripped from the
naphtha product. It consists
of saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C4.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/781


         Substances              Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), straight-    649-104-00-3         272-882-7             68919-09-5    H, K
run naphtha catalytic
reforming off; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
the catalytic reforming of
straight-run naphtha and
fractionation of the total
effluent. It consists of
methane, ethane, and
propane.)

Gases (petroleum), fluidised    649-105-00-9         272-893-7             68919-20-0    H, K
catalytic cracker splitter
overheads; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the fractionation of the
charge to the C3-C4 splitter.
It consists predominantly of
C3 hydrocarbons.)
L 396/782         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), straight-    649-106-00-4         272-883-2             68919-10-8    H, K
run stabiliser off; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the fractionation of the
liquid from the first tower
used in the distillation of
crude oil. It consists of
saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic    649-107-00-X         273-169-3             68952-76-1    H, K
cracked naphtha
debutaniser; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of catalytic
cracked naphtha. It consists
of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/783


         Substances               Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),            649-108-00-5         273-170-9             68952-77-2    H, K
catalytic cracked distillate
and naphtha stabiliser;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
the fractionation of catalytic
cracked naphtha and
distillate. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum),            649-109-00-0         273-175-6             68952-81-8    H, K
thermal-cracked distillate,
gas oil and naphtha
absorber; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the separation of thermal-
cracked distillates, naphtha
and gas oil. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C6.)
L 396/784         EN             Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances          Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),         649-110-00-6          273-176-1             68952-82-9    H, K
thermal cracked
hydrocarbon fractionation
stabiliser, petroleum coking;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the fractionation
stabilisation of thermal
cracked hydrocarbons from
a petroleum coking process.
It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C6.)

Gases (petroleum, light        649-111-00-1         273-265-5             68955-28-2    H, K
steam-cracked, butadiene
conc.; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the distillation of products
from a thermal cracking
process. It consists of
hydrocarbons having a
carbon number
predominantly of C4.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/785


         Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), straight-   649-112-00-7         273-270-2             68955-34-0    H, K
run naphtha catalytic
reformer stabiliser
overhead; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
the catalytic reforming of
straight-run naphtha and the
fractionation of the total
effluent. It consists of
saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C2 through C4.)

Hydrocarbons, C4;              649-113-00-2         289-339-5             87741-01-3    H, K
Petroleum gas

Alkanes, C1-4, C3-rich;        649-114-00-8         292-456-4             90622-55-2    H, K
Petroleum gas

Gases (petroleum), steam-      649-115-00-3         295-404-9             92045-22-2    H, K
cracker C3-rich; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the distillation of products
from a steam cracking
process. It consists
predominantly of propylene
with some propane and
boils in the range of
approximately − 70 °C to
0 °C.)
L 396/786         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Hydrocarbons, C4, steam-        649-116-00-9         295-405-4             92045-23-3    H, K
cracker distillate; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the distillation of the
products of a steam
cracking process. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having a
carbon number of C4,
predominantly 1-butene and
2-butene, containing also
butane and isobutene and
boiling in the range of
approximately − 12 °C to
5 °C.)

Petroleum gases, liquefied,     649-117-00-4         295-463-0             92045-80-2    H, K, S
sweetened, C4 fraction;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
subjecting a liquified
petroleum gas mix to a
sweetening process to
oxidise mercaptans or to
remove acidic impurities. It
consists predominantly of
C4 saturated and unsaturated
hydrocarbons.)
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/787


         Substances           Index number           EC number            CAS number    Notes

Raffinates (petroleum),       649-119 -00-5        307-769-4             97722-19-5    H, K
steam-cracked C4 fraction
cuprous ammonium acetate
extn., C3-5 and C3-5
unsaturated., butadiene-free;
Petroleum gas

Gases (petroleum), amine     649-120-00-0          270-746-1             68477-65-6    H, K
system feed; Refinery gas

(The feed gas to the amine
system for removal of
hydrogen sulphide. It
consists primarily of
hydrogen. Carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide,
hydrogen sulfide and
aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5 may also
be present.)
L 396/788         EN             Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances          Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), benzene     649-121-00-6         270-747-7             68477-66-7    H, K
unit hydrodesulphuriser off;
Refinery gas

(Off gases produced by the
benzene unit. It consists
primarily of hydrogen.
Carbon monoxide and
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C6,
including benzene, may also
be present.)

Gases (petroleum), benzene     649-122-00-1         270-748-2             68477-67-8    H, K
unit recycle, hydrogen-rich;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
recycling the gases of the
benzene unit. It consists
primarily of hydrogen with
various small amounts of
carbon monoxide and
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C1
through C6.)
30.12.2006       EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/789


         Substances                Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), blend          649-123-00-7         270-749-8             68477-68-9    H, K
oil, hydrogen-nitrogen-rich;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
distillation of a blend oil. It
consists primarily of
hydrogen and nitrogen with
various small amounts of
carbon monoxide, carbon
dioxide, and aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), catalytic      649-124-00-2         270-759-2             68477-77-0    H, K
reformed naphtha stripper
overheads; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
stabilisation of catalytic
reformed naphtha. It
consists of hydrogen and
saturated hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4.)
L 396/790         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), C6-8         649-125-00-8         270-761-3             68477-80-5    H, K
catalytic reformer recycle;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
distillation of products from
catalytic reforming of C6-C8
feed and recycled to
conserve hydrogen. It
consists primarily of
hydrogen. It may also
contain various small
amounts of carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide,
nitrogen, and hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), C6-8         649-126-00-3         270-762-9             68477-81-6    H, K
catalytic reformer; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
distillation of products from
catalytic reforming of C6-C8
feed. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C1
through C5 and hydrogen.)
30.12.2006      EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/791


         Substances            Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), C6-8       649-127-00-9         270-763-4             68477-82-7    H, K
catalytic reformer recycle,
hydrogen-rich; Refinery gas

Gases (petroleum), C2-        649-128-00-4         270-766-0             68477-84-9    H, K
return stream; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
the extraction of hydrogen
from a gas stream which
consists primarily of
hydrogen with small
amounts of nitrogen, carbon
monoxide, methane, ethane,
and ethylene. It contains
predominantly
hydrocarbons such as
methane, ethane, and
ethylene with small amounts
of hydrogen, nitrogen and
carbon monoxide.)
L 396/792         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), dry sour, 649-129-00-X            270-774-4             68477-92-9    H, K
gas-concentration-unit-off;
Refinery gas

(The complex combination
of dry gases from a gas
concentration unit. It
consists of hydrogen,
hydrogen sulphide and
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C3.)

Gases (petroleum), gas          649-130-00-5         270-776-5             68477-93-0    H, K
concentration reabsorber
distillation; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
distillation of products from
combined gas streams in a
gas concentration
reabsorber. It consists
predominantly of hydrogen,
carbon monoxide, carbon
dioxide, nitrogen, hydrogen
sulphide and hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in
the range of C1 through C3.)
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/793


         Substances            Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum),            649-131-00-0         270-779-1             68477-96-3    H, K
hydrogen absorber off;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained by absorbing
hydrogen from a hydrogen
rich stream. It consists of
hydrogen, carbon
monoxide, nitrogen, and
methane with small amounts
of C2 hydrocarbons.)

Gases (petroleum),            649-132-00-6         270-780-7             68477-97-4    H, K
hydrogen-rich; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
separated as a gas from
hydrocarbon gases by
chilling. It consists
primarily of hydrogen with
various small amounts of
carbon monoxide, nitrogen,
methane, and C2
hydrocarbons.)
L 396/794         EN             Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances          Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum),             649-133-00-1         270-781-2             68477-98-5    H, K
hydrotreater blend oil
recycle, hydrogen-nitrogen-
rich; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained from recycled
hydrotreated blend oil. It
consists primarily of
hydrogen and nitrogen with
various small amounts of
carbon monoxide, carbon
dioxide and hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), recycle,    649-134-00-7         270-783-3             68478-00-2    H, K
hydrogen-rich; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained from recycled
reactor gases. It consists
primarily of hydrogen with
various small amounts of
carbon monoxide, carbon
dioxide, nitrogen, hydrogen
sulphide, and saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in
the range of C1 through C5.)
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/795


         Substances            Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), reformer   649-135-00-2         270-784-9             68478-01-3    H, K
make-up, hydrogen-rich;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained from the
reformers. It consists
primarily of hydrogen with
various small amounts of
carbon monoxide and
aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum),            649-136-00-8         270-785-4             68478-02-4    H, K
reforming hydrotreater;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained from the reforming
hydrotreating process. It
consists primarily of
hydrogen, methane, and
ethane with various small
amounts of hydrogen
sulphide and aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range C3 through C5.)
L 396/796         EN             Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances          Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum),             649-137-00-3         270-787-5             68478-03-5    H, K
reforming hydrotreater,
hydrogen-methane-rich;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained from the reforming
hydrotreating process. It
consists primarily of
hydrogen and methane with
various small amounts of
carbon monoxide, carbon
dioxide, nitrogen and
saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C2 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum),             649-138-00-9         270-788-0             68478-04-6    H, K
reforming hydrotreater
make-up, hydrogen-rich;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained from the reforming
hydrotreating process. It
consists primarily of
hydrogen with various small
amounts of carbon
monoxide and aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C5.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/797


         Substances              Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), thermal      649-139-00-4         270-789-6             68478-05-7    H, K
cracking distillation;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination
produced by distillation of
products from a thermal
cracking process. It consists
of hydrogen, hydrogen
sulphide, carbon monoxide,
carbon dioxide and
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C6.)

Tail gas (petroleum),           649-140-00-X         270-805-1             68478-25-1    H, K
catalytic cracker
refractionation absorber;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
refractionation of products
from a catalytic cracking
process. It consists of
hydrogen and hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C3.)
L 396/798         EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances            Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),            649-141-00-5         270-807-2             68478-27-3    H, K
catalytic reformed naphtha
separator; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the catalytic reforming of
straight-run naphtha. It
consists of hydrogen and
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C6.)

Tail gas (petroleum),            649-142-00-0         270-808-8             68478-28-4    H, K
catalytic reformed naphtha
stabiliser; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the stabilisation of catalytic
reformed naphtha. It
consists of hydrogen and
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C6.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/799


         Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),          649-143-00-6         270-809-3             68478-29-5    H, K
cracked distillate
hydrotreater separator;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
treating cracked distillates
with hydrogen in the
presence of a catalyst. It
consists of hydrogen and
saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum),        649-144-00-1           270-810-9             68478-30-8    H, K
hydrodesulphurised straight-
run naphtha separator;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
hydrodesulphurisation of
straight-run naphtha. It
consists of hydrogen and
saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C6.)
L 396/800         EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), catalytic      649-145-00-7         270-999-8             68513-14-4    H, K
reformed straight-run
naphtha stabiliser
overheads; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the catalytic reforming of
straight-run naphtha
followed by fractionation of
the total effluent. It consists
of hydrogen, methane,
ethane and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), reformer       649-146-00-2         271-003-4             68513-18-8    H, K
effluent high-pressure flash
drum off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
produced by the high-
pressure flashing of the
effluent from the reforming
reactor. It consists primarily
of hydrogen with various
small amounts of methane,
ethane, and propane.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/801


         Substances               Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), reformer      649-147-00-8         271-005-5             68513-19-9    H, K
effluent low-pressure flash
drum off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
produced by low-pressure
flashing of the effluent from
the reforming reactor. It
consists primarily of
hydrogen with various small
amounts of methane, ethane,
and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), oil           649-148-00-3         271-258-1             68527-15-1    H, K
refinery gas distillation off;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination
separated by distillation of a
gas stream containing
hydrogen, carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide
and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers in the range
of C1 through C6 or obtained
by cracking ethane and
propane. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C2,
hydrogen, nitrogen, and
carbon monoxide.)
L 396/802         EN            Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances         Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), benzene    649-149-00-9         271-623-5             68602-82-4    H, K
unit hydrotreater
depentaniser overheads;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination
produced by treating the
feed from the benzene unit
with hydrogen in the
presence of a catalyst
followed by depentanising.
It consists primarily of
hydrogen, ethane and
propane with various small
amounts of nitrogen, carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide
and hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C6. It may
contain trace amounts of
benzene.)
30.12.2006       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/803


         Substances              Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum),              649-150-00-4         271-625-6             68602-84-6    H, K
secondary absorber off,
fluidised catalytic cracker
overheads fractionator;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination
produced by the
fractionation of the
overhead products from the
catalytic cracking process in
the fluidised catalytic
cracker. It consists of
hydrogen, nitrogen, and
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C3.)

Petroleum products, refinery 649-151-00 -X           271-750-6             68607-11-4    H, K
gases; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
which consists primarily of
hydrogen with various small
amounts of methane, ethane
and propane.)
L 396/804         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum),              649-152-00-5         272-182-1             68783-06-2    H, K
hydrocracking low-pressure
separator; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained by the liquid-
vapour separation of the
hydrocracking process
reactor effluent. It consists
predominantly of hydrogen
and saturated hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C3.)

Gases (petroleum), refinery;    649-153-00-0         272-338-9             68814-67-5    H, K
Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained from various
petroleum refining
operations. It consists of
hydrogen and hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C3.)
30.12.2006       EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/805


         Substances              Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum),              649-154-00-6         272-343-6             68814-90-4    H, K
platformer products
separator off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained from the chemical
reforming of naphthenes to
aromatics. It consists of
hydrogen and saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C2 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum),              649-155-00-1         272-775-5             68911-58-0    H, K
hydrotreated sour kerosine
depentaniser stabiliser off;
Refinery gas

(The complex combination
obtained from the
depentaniser stabilisation of
hydrotreated kerosine. It
consists primarily of
hydrogen, methane, ethane,
and propane with various
small amounts of nitrogen,
hydrogen sulphide, carbon
monoxide and hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C4 through C5.)
L 396/806         EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances            Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum),               649-156-00-7         272-776-0             68911-59-1    H, K
hydrotreated sour kerosine
flash drum; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained from the flash
drum of the unit treating
sour kerosine with hydrogen
in the presence of a catalyst.
It consists primarily of
hydrogen and methane with
various small amounts of
nitrogen, carbon monoxide,
and hydro-carbons having
carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C2 through C5.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/807


         Substances              Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), distillate   649-157-00-2         272-873-8             68919-01-7    H, K
unifiner desulphurisation
stripper off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
stripped from the liquid
product of the unifiner
desulphurisation process. It
consists of hydrogen
sulphide, methane, ethane,
and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), fluidised    649-158-00-8         272-874-3             68919-02-8    H, K
catalytic cracker
fractionation off; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination
produced by the
fractionation of the
overhead product of the
fluidised catalytic cracking
process. It consists of
hydrogen, hydrogen
sulphide, nitrogen, and
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C5.)
L 396/808         EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), fluidised      649-159-00-3         272-875-9             68919-03-9    H, K
catalytic cracker scrubbing
secondary absorber off;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination
produced by scrubbing the
overhead gas from the
fluidised catalytic cracker. It
consists of hydrogen,
nitrogen, methane, ethane
and propane.)

Gases (petroleum), heavy          649-160-00-9         272-876-4             68919-04-0    H, K
distillate hydrotreater
desulphurisation stripper
off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
stripped from the liquid
product of the heavy
distillate hydrotreater
desulphurisation process. It
consists of hydrogen,
hydrogen sulphide, and
saturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C5.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/809


         Substances               Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum),               649-161-00-4         272-880-6             68919-07-3    H, K
platformer stabiliser off,
light ends fractionation;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained by the
fractionation of the light
ends of the platinum
reactors of the platformer
unit. It consists of hydrogen,
methane, ethane and
propane.)

Gases (petroleum), preflash      649-162-00-X         272-881-1             68919-08-4    H, K
tower off, crude distillation;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination
produced from the first
tower used in the distillation
of crude oil. It consists of
nitrogen and saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)
L 396/810         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), tar          649-163-00-5         272-884-8             68919-11-9    H, K
stripper off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained by the
fractionation of reduced
crude oil. It consists of
hydrogen and hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), unifiner     649-164-00-0         272-885-3             68919-12-0    H, K
stripper off; Refinery gas

(A combination of hydrogen
and methane obtained by
fractionation of the products
from the unifiner unit.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/811


         Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),          649-165-00-6         273-173-5             68952-79-4    H, K
catalytic
hydrodesulphurised naphtha
separator; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the hydrodesulphurisation
of naphtha. It consists of
hydrogen, methane, ethane,
and propane.)

Tail gas (petroleum),          649-166-00-1         273-174-0             68952-80-7    H, K
straight-run naphtha
hydrodesulphuriser;
Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained from the
hydrodesulphurisation of
straight-run naphtha. It
consists of hydrogen and
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C5.)
L 396/812         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), sponge       649-167-00-7         273-269-7             68955-33-9    H, K
absorber off, fluidised
catalytic cracker and gas oil
desulphuriser overhead
fractionation; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained by the
fractionation of products
from the fluidised catalytic
cracker and gas oil
desulphuriser. It consists of
hydrogen and hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/813


         Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), crude       649-168-00-2         273-563-5             68989-88-8    H, K
distillation and catalytic
cracking; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
produced by crude
distillation and catalytic
cracking processes. It
consists of hydrogen,
hydrogen sulphide,
nitrogen, carbon monoxide
and paraffinic and olefinic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), gas oil     649-169-00-8         295-397-2             92045-15-3    H, K
diethanolamine scrubber
off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
produced by
desulphurisation of gas oils
with diethanolamine. It
consists predominantly of
hydrogen sulphide,
hydrogen and aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C1
through C5.)
L 396/814         EN             Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances          Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), gas oil     649-170-00-3         295-398-8             92045-16-4    H, K
hydrodesulphurisation
effluent; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained by separation of
the liquid phase from the
effluent from the
hydrogenation reaction. It
consists predominantly of
hydrogen, hydrogen
sulphide and aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C3.)

Gases (petroleum), gas oil     649-171-00-9         295-399-3             92045-17-5    H, K
hydrodesulphurisation
purge; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
gases obtained from the
reformer and from the
purges from the
hydrogenation reactor. It
consists predominantly of
hydrogen and aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C4.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/815


         Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum),             649-172-00-4         295-400-7             92045-18-6    H, K
hydrogenator effluent flash
drum off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination of
gases obtained from flash of
the effluents after the
hydrogenation reaction. It
consists predominantly of
hydrogen and aliphatic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C6.)

Gases (petroleum), naphtha     649-173-00-X         295-401-2             92045-19-7    H, K
steam cracking high-
pressure residual; Refinery
gas

(A complex combination
obtained as a mixture of the
non-condensable portions
from the product of a
naphtha steam cracking
process as well as residual
gases obtained during the
preparation of subsequent
products. It consists
predominantly of hydrogen
and paraffinic and olefinic
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C5
with which natural gas may
also be mixed.)
L 396/816         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), residue      649-174-00-5         295-402-8             92045-20-0    H, K
visbaking off; Refinery gas

(A complex combination
obtained from viscosity
reduction of residues in a
furnace. It consists
predominantly of hydrogen
sulphide and paraffinic and
olefinic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C5.)

Gases (petroleum), C3-4;        649-177-00-1         268-629-5             68131-75-9    H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
distillation of products from
the cracking of crude oil. It
consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in
the range of C3 through C4,
predominantly of propane
and propylene, and boiling
in the range of
approximately −51 °C to
−1 °C.)
30.12.2006       EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/817


         Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),          649-178-00-7         269-617-2             68307-98-2    H, K
catalytic cracked distillate
and catalytic cracked
naphtha fractionation
absorber; Petroleum gas

(The complex combination
of hydrocarbons from the
distillation of the products
from catalytic cracked
distillates and catalytic
cracked naphtha. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C1
through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum),          649-179-00-2         269-618-8             68307-99-3    H, K
catalytic polymerisation
naphtha fractionation
stabiliser; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the
fractionation stabilisation
products from
polymerisation of naphtha.
It consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C1
through C4.)
L 396/818         EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances            Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),            649-180-00-8         269-619-3             68308-00-9    H, K
catalytic reformed naphtha
fractionation stabiliser,
hydrogen sulphide-free;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation stabilisation of
catalytic reformed naphtha
and from which hydrogen
sulphide has been removed
by amine treatment. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum),            649-181-00-3         269-620-9             68308-01-0    H, K
cracked distillate
hydrotreater stripper;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
treating thermal cracked
distillates with hydrogen in
the presence of a catalyst. It
consists predominantly of
saturated hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C6.)
30.12.2006      EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/819


         Substances              Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),           649-182-00-9         269-630-3             68308-10-1    H, K
straight-run distillate
hydrodesulphuriser,
hydrogen sulphide-free;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
catalytic
hydrodesulphurisation of
straight run distillates and
from which hydrogen
sulphide has been removed
by amine treatment. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum), gas oil   649-183-00-4         269-623-5             68308-03-2    H, K
catalytic cracking absorber;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the distillation of products
from the catalytic cracking
of gas oil. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C5.)
L 396/820         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum), gas       649-184-00-X         269-624-0             68308-04-3    H, K
recovery plant; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the
distillation of products from
miscellaneous hydrocarbon
streams. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum), gas       649-185-00-5         269-625-6             68308-05-4    H, K
recovery plant deethaniser;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the
distillation of products from
miscellaneous hydrocarbon
streams. It consists of
hydrocarbon having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum),           649-186-00-0         269-626-1             68308-06-5    H, K
hydrodesulphurised
distillate and
hydrodesulphurised naphtha
fractionator, acid-free;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of
hydrodesulphurised naphtha
and distillate hydrocarbon
streams and treated to
remove acidic impurities. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C5.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/821


         Substances               Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),            649-187-00-6         269-627-7             68308-07-6    H, K
hydrodesulphurised vacuum
gas oil stripper, hydrogen
sulphide-free; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
stripping stabilisation of
catalytic
hydrodesulphurised vacuum
gas oil and from which
hydrogen sulphide has been
removed by amine
treatment. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C6.)

Tail gas (petroleum), light      649-188-00-1         269-629-8             68308-09-8    H, K
straight-run naphtha
stabiliser, hydrogen
sulphide-free; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation stabilisation of
light straight-run naphtha
and from which hydrogen
sulphide has been removed
by amine treatment. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C5.)
L 396/822         EN             Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances          Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Tail gas (petroleum),          649-189-00-7         269-631-9             68308-11-2    H, K
propane-propylene
alkylation feed prep
deethaniser; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the distillation of the
reaction products of propane
with propylene. It consists
of hydrocarbons having
carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4.)

Tail gas (petroleum),          649-190-00-2         269-632-4             68308-12-3    H, K
vacuum gas oil
hydrodesulphuriser,
hydrogen sulphide-free;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
catalytic
hydrodesulphurisation of
vacuum gas oil and from
which hydrogen sulphide
has been removed by amine
treatment. It consists
predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C6.)
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/823


         Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), catalytic   649-191-00-8         270-071-2             68409-99-4    H, K
cracked overheads;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the distillation of products
from the catalytic cracking
process. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C3 through C5
and boiling in the range of
approximately −48 °C to 32
°C.)

Alkanes, C1-2; Petroleum       649-193-00-9         270-651-5             68475-57-0    H, K
gas

Alkanes, C2-3; Petroleum       649-194-00-4         270-652-0             68475-58-1    H, K
gas

Alkanes, C3-4; Petroleum       649-195-00-X         270-653-6             68475-59-2    H, K
gas

Alkanes, C4-5; Petroleum       649-196-00-5         270-654-1             68475-60-5    H, K
gas

Fuel gases; Petroleum gas      649-197-00-0         270-667-2             68476-26-6    H, K

(A combination of light
gases. It consists
predominantly of hydrogen
and/or low molecular
weight hydrocarbons.)
L 396/824         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Fuel gases, crude oil of        649-198-00-6         270-670-9             68476-29-9    H, K
distillates; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
light gases produced by
distillation of crude oil and
by catalytic reforming of
naphtha. It consists of
hydrogen and hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C1 through C4 and boiling
in the range of
approximately − 217 °C to
− 12 °C.)

Hydrocarbons, C3-4;             649-199-00-1         270-681-9             68476-40-4    H, K
Petroleum gas

Hydrocarbons, C4-5;             649-200-00-5         270-682-4             68476-42-6    H, K
Petroleum gas

Hydrocarbons, C2-4, C3-rich; 649-201-00-0            270-689-2             68476-49-3    H, K
Petroleum gas
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                      L 396/825


         Substances               Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Petroleum gases, liquefied;      649-202-00-6         270-704-2             68476-85-7    H, K, S
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the distillation of crude oil.
It consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C3 through C7 and boiling
in the range of
approximately −40 °C to
80°C.)

Petroleum gases, liquefied,      649-203-00-1         270-705-8             68476-86-8    H, K, S
sweetened; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained by
subjecting liquefied
petroleum gas mix to a
sweetening process to
convert mercaptans or to
remove acidic impurities. It
consists of hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C3 through C7 and boiling
in the range of
approximately −40 °C to 80
°C.)
L 396/826         EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances            Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), C3-4,         649-204-00-7         270-724-1             68477-33-8    H, K
isobutane-rich; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the
distillation of saturated and
unsaturated hydrocarbons
usually ranging in carbon
numbers from C3 through
C6, predominantly butane
and isobutane. It consists of
saturated and unsaturated
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C3
through C4, predominantly
isobutane.)

Distillates (petroleum), C3-6,   649-205-00-2         270-726-2             68477-35-0    H, K
piperylene-rich; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons from the
distillation of saturated and
unsaturated aliphatic
hydrocarbons usually
ranging in the carbon
numbers C3 through C6. It
consists of saturated and
unsaturated hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers in
the range of C3 through C6,
predominantly piperylenes.)
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/827


         Substances               Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum), butane        649-206-00-8         270-750-3             68477-69-0    H, K
splitter overheads;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the distillation of the butane
stream. It consists of
aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C3 through C4.)

Gases (petroleum), C2-3;         649-207-00-3         270-751-9             68477-70-3    H, K
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons produced by
the distillation of products
from a catalytic
fractionation process. It
contains predominantly
ethane, ethylene, propane,
and propylene.)

Gases (petroleum),               649-208-00-9         270-752-4             68477-71-4    H, K
catalytic-cracked gas oil
depropaniser bottoms, C4-
rich acid-free; Petroleum
gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
fractionation of catalytic
cracked gas oil hydrocarbon
stream and treated to
remove hydrogen sulphide
and other acidic
components. It consists of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers in the range of C3
through C5, predominantly
C4.)
L 396/828         EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        30.12.2006


            Substances            Index number          EC number            CAS number    Notes

Gases (petroleum),               649-209-00-4         270-754-5             68477-72-5    H, K
catalytic-cracked naphtha
debutaniser bottoms, C3-5-
rich; Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the stabilisation of catalytic
cracked naphtha. It consists
of aliphatic hydrocarbons
having carbon numbers
predominantly in the range
of C3 through C5.)

Tail gas (petroleum),            649-210-00-X         269-628-2             68308-08-7    H, K"
isomerised naphtha
fractionation stabiliser;
Petroleum gas

(A complex combination of
hydrocarbons obtained from
the fractionation
stabilisation products from
isomerised naphtha. It
consists predominantly of
hydrocarbons having carbon
numbers predominantly in
the range of C1 through C4.)
30.12.2006         EN              Official Journal of the European Union                       L 396/829


                                               Appendix 5

                              Point 30 – Toxic to reproduction: category 1

               Substances                  Index number            EC       CAS number   Notes
                                                                 number

Carbon monoxide                           006-001-00-2         211-128-3    630-08-0

Lead hexafluorosilicate                   009-014-00-1         247-278-1    25808-74-6

Lead compounds with the exception         082-001-00-6                                   A, E
of those specified elsewhere in this
Annex

Lead alkyls                               082-002-00-1                                   A, E

Lead azide                                082-003-00-7         236-542-1    13424-46-9

Lead chromate                             082-004-00-2         231-846-0    7758-97-6

Lead di(acetate)                          082-005-00-8         206-104-4    301-04-2

Trilead bis(orthophosphate)               082-006-00-3         231-205-5    7446-27-7

Lead acetate                              082-007-00-9         215-630-3    1335-32-6

Lead(II) methanesulphonate                082-008-00-4         401-750-5    17570-76-2

C.I. Pigment Yellow 34;                   082-009-00-X         215-693-7    1344-37-2

(This substance is identified in the
Colour Index by Colour Index
Constitution Number, C.I. 77603.)
L 396/830        EN                Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


              Substances                   Index number            EC       CAS number   Notes
                                                                 number

C.I. Pigment Red 104;                     082-010-00-5         235-759-9    12656-85-8

(This substance is identified in the
Colour Index by Colour Index
Constitution Number, C.I. 77605.)

Lead hydrogen arsenate                    082-011-00-0         232-064-2    7784-40-9

1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane               602-021-00-6         202-479-3    96-12-8

2-bromopropane                            602-085-00-5         200-855-1    75-26-3      E

Warfarin; 4-hydroxy-3-(3-oxo-1-           607-056-00-0         201-377-6    81-81-2
phenylbutyl)coumarin

Lead 2,4,6-trinitroresorcinoxide, lead    609-019-00-4         239-290-0    15245-44-0
styphnate
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/831


                                               Appendix 6

                              Point 30 – Toxic to reproduction: category 2

         Substances               Index number            EC number             CAS number   Notes

Linuron (ISO)                   006-021-00-1          206-356-5             330-55-2         E

3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1-
methoxy-1-methylurea

6-(2-Chloroethyl)-6(2-          014-014-00-X          253-704-7             37894-46-5
methoxyethoxy)-2,5,7,10-
tetraoxa-6-silaundecane;
etacelasil

Flusilazole (ISO); bis(4-       014-017-00-6          –                     85509-19-9       E
fluorophenyl)-(methyl)-
(1H-1,2,4-triazol-1-
ylmethyl)-silane

A mixture of: 4-[[bis-(4-       014-019-00-7          403-250-2             –                E
fluorophenyl)-
methylsilyl]methyl]-4H-
1,2,4-triazole; 1-[[bis-(4-
fluorophenyl)methyl-
silyl]methyl]-1H-1,2,4-
triazole
L 396/832         EN           Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


            Substances        Index number          EC number            CAS number   Notes

Potassium dichromate         024-002-00-6         231-906-6             7778-50-9     E

Ammonium dichromate          024-003-00-1         232-143-1             7789-09-5     E

Sodium dichromate            024-004-00-7         234-190-3             10588-01-9    E
anhydrate

Sodium dichromate,           024-004-01-4         234-190-3             7789-12-0     E
dihydrate

Sodium chromate              024-018-00-3         231-889-5             7775-11-3     E

Nickel tetracarbonyl         028-001-00-1         236-669-2             13463-39-3

Cadmium fluoride             048-006-00-2         232-222-0             7790-79-6     E

Cadmium chloride             048-008-00-3         233-296-7             10108-64-2    E

Cadmium sulphate             048-009-00-9         233-331-6             10124-36-4    E

Benzo[a]pyrene;              601-032-00-3         200-028-5             50-32-8
benzo[d,e,f]chrysene

1-Bromopropane               602-019-00-5         203-445-0             106-94-5

Propyl bromide

n-Propyl bromide

1,2,3-Trichloropropane       602-062-00-X         202-486-1             96-18-4       D

Diphenylether; octabromo     602-094-00-4         251-087-9             32536-52-0
derivate

2-Methoxyethanol; ethylene   603-011-00-4         203-713-7             109-86-4
glycol monomethyl ether;
methylglycol
30.12.2006     EN               Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/833


         Substances            Index number          EC number            CAS number   Notes

2-Ethoxyethanol; ethylene     603-012-00-X         203-804-1             110-80-5
glycol monoethyl ether;
ethylglycol

1,2-Dimethoxyethane           603-031-00-3         203-794-9             110-71-4

ethylene glycol dimethyl
ether

EGDME

2,3-Epoxypropan-1-ol;         603-063-00-8         209-128-3             556-52-5      E
glycidol oxiranemethanol

2-Methoxypropanol             603-106-00-0         216-455-5             1589-47-5

Bis(2-methoxyethyl) ether     603-139-00-0         203-924-4             111-96-6

R-2,3-epoxy-1-propanol        603-143-002          404-660-4             57044-25-4    E

1,2-Bis(2-                    603-176-00-2         203-977-3             112-49-2
methoxyethoxy)ethane

TEGDME;

Triethylene glycol dimethyl
ether;

Triglyme

4,4'-                         604-024-00-8         401-720-1             6807-17-6
isobutylethylidenediphenol;
2,2-bis (4'-hydroxyphenyl)-
4-methylpentane

Tetrahydrothiopyran-3-        606-062-00-0         407-330-8             61571-06-0
carboxaldehyde
L 396/834         EN             Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


            Substances          Index number          EC number            CAS number   Notes

2-Methoxyethyl acetate;     607-036-00-1            203-772-9             110-49-6
ethylene glycol monomethyl
ether acetate; methylglycol
acetate

2-Ethoxyethyl acetate;         607-037-00-7         203-839-2             111-15-9
ethylene glycol monoethyl
ether acetate; ethylglycol
acetate

2-Ethylhexyl 3,5-bis(1,1-      607-203-00-9         279-452-8             80387-97-9
dimethylethyl)-4-
hydroxyphenyl methyl thio
acetate

Bis(2-Methoxyethyl)            607-228-00-5         204-212-6             117-82-8
phthalate

2-Methoxypropyl acetate        607-251-00-0         274-724-2             70657-70-4

Fluazifop-butyl (ISO); butyl   607-304-00-8         274-125-6             69806-50-4
(RS)-2-[4-(5-
trifluoromethyl-2-
pyridyloxy)phenoxy]propio
nate
30.12.2006      EN               Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/835


         Substances             Index number          EC number            CAS number      Notes

Vinclozolin (ISO); N-3,5-  607-307-00-4             256-599-6             50471-44-8
Dichlorophenyl-5-methyl-5-
vinyl-1,3-oxazolidine-2,4-
dione

Methoxyacetic acid             607-312-00-1         210-894-6             625-45-6         E

Bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate;   607-317-00-9         204-211-0             117-81-7
di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate;
DEHP

Dibutyl phthalate; DBP         607-318-00-4         201-557-4             84-74-2

(+/-) tetrahydrofurfuryl (R)- 607-373-00-4          414-200-4             119738-06-6      E
2-[4-(6-chloroquinoxalin-2-
yloxy)phenyloxy]propionate

1,2-benzenedicarboxylic        607-426-00-1         284-032-2 [1]         84777-06-0 [1]
acid, dipentylester,
branched and linear [1]                             - [2]                 - [2]

n-pentyl-isopentylphthalate                         205-017-9 [3]         131-18-0 [3]
[2]
                                                    -[4]                  42925-80-4 [4]
di-n-pentyl phthalate [3]

Diisopentylphthalate [4]

Benzyl butyl phthalate         607-430-00-3         201-622-7             85-68-7

BBP

1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic        607-480-00-6         271-084-6             68515-42-4
acid

di-C7-11-branched and
linear alkylesters
L 396/836         EN             Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


            Substances          Index number          EC number            CAS number   Notes

A mixture of: disodium 4-      607-487-00-4         402-660-9             —
(3-ethoxycarbonyl-4-(5-(3-
ethoxycarbonyl-5-hydroxy-
1-(4-
sulfonatophenyl)pyrazol-4-
yl)penta-2,4-dienylidene)-
4,5-dihydro-5-oxopyrazol-
1-yl)benzenesulfonate;

trisodium 4-(3-
ethoxycarbonyl-4-(5-(3-
ethoxycarbonyl-5-oxido-1-
(4-sulfonatophenyl)pyrazol-
4-yl)penta-2,4-dienylidene)-
4,5-dihydro-5-oxopyrazol-
1-yl)benzenesulfonate

Dinocap (ISO)                  609-023-00-6         254-408-0             39300-45-3    E

Binapacryl (ISO); 2-sec-       609-024-00-1         207-612-9             485-31-4
butyl-4,6-dinitrophenyl-3-
methylcrotonate

Dinoseb; 6-sec-butyl-2,4-      609-025-00-7         201-861-7             88-85-7
dinitrophenol

Salts and esters of dinoseb,   609-026-00-2
with the exception of those
specified elsewhere in this
Annex

Dinoterb; 2-tert-butyl-4,6-    609-030-00-4         215-813-8             1420-07-1
dinitrophenol

Salts and esters of dinoterb   609-031-00-X
30.12.2006      EN             Official Journal of the European Union                    L 396/837


         Substances           Index number          EC number            CAS number   Notes

Nitrofen (ISO); 2,4          609-040-00-9         217-406-0             1836-75-5
dichlorophenyl 4-
nitrophenyl ether

Methyl-ONN-azoxymethyl       611-004-00-2         209-765-7             592-62-1
acetate; methyl azoxy
methyl acetate

2-[2-hydroxy-3-(2-           611-131-00-3         420-580-2             —
chlorophenyl)carbamoyl-1-
naphthylazo]-7-[2-hydroxy-
3-(3-
methylphenyl)carbamoyl-1-
naphthylazo]fluoren-9-one

Azafenidin                   611-140-00-2         —                     68049-83-2

Tridemorph (ISO); 2,6-       613-020-00-5         246-347-3             24602-86-6
dimethyl-4-
tridecylmorpholine

Ethylene thiourea;           613-039-00-9         202-506-9             96-45-7
imidazolidine-2-thione; 2-
imidazoline-2-thiol

Carbendazim (ISO)            613-048-00-8         234-232-0             10605-21-7

methyl benzimidazol-2-
ylcarbamate

Benomyl (ISO)                613-049-00-3         241-775-7             17804-35-2

methyl 1-
(butylcarbamoyl)benzimida
zol-2-ylcarbamate
L 396/838         EN             Official Journal of the European Union                    30.12.2006


            Substances          Index number            EC number          CAS number   Notes

Cycloheximide                  613-140-00-8         200-636-0             66-81-9

Flumioxazin (ISO); N-(7-       613-166-00-X         –                     103361-09-7
Fluoro-3,4-dihydro-3-oxo-
4-prop-2-ynyl-2H-1,4-
benzoxazin-6-yl)cyclohex-
1-ene-1,2-dicarboxamide

(2RS,3RS)-3-(2-                613-175-00-9         406-850-2             106325-08-0
Chlorophenyl)-2-(4-
fluorophenyl)-[(1H-1,2,4-
triazol-1-yl)-methyl]oxirane

3-Ethyl-2-methyl-2-(3-         613-191-00-6         421-150-7             143860-04-2
methylbutyl)-1,3-
oxazolidine

A mixture of: 1,3,5-tris(3-    613-199-00-X         421-550-1             —
aminomethylphenyl)-1,3,5-
(1H,3H,5H)-triazine-2,4,6-
trione;

a mixture of oligomers of
3,5-bis(3-
aminomethylphenyl)-1-
poly[3,5-bis(3-
aminomethylphenyl)-2,4,6-
trioxo-1,3,5-(1H,3H,5H)-
triazin-1-yl]-1,3,5-
(1H,3H,5H)-triazine-2,4,6-
trione
30.12.2006     EN          Official Journal of the European Union                     L 396/839


         Substances       Index number          EC number            CAS number   Notes

N,N-dimethylformamide;   616-001-00-X         200-679-5             68-12-2
dimethyl formamide

N, N-Dimethylacetamide   616-011-00-4         204-826-4             127-19-5      E

Formamide                616-052-00-8         200-842-0             75-12-7

N-methylacetamide        616-053-00-3         201-182-6             79-16-3

N-methylformamide        616-056-00-X         204-624-6             123-39-7      E
L 396/840             EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


                                                     Appendix 7

                       Special provisions on the labelling of articles containing asbestos

1.          All articles containing asbestos or the packaging thereof must bear the label defined as
            follows:

            (a)   the label conforming to the specimen below shall be at least 5 cm high (H) and
                  2,5 cm wide;

            (b)   it shall consist of two parts:

                  –        the top part (h1 = 40 % H) shall include the letter "a" in white, on a black
                           background,

                  –        the bottom part (h2= 60 % H) shall include the standard wording in white
                           and/or black, on a red background, and shall be clearly legible;

            (c)   if the article contains crocidolite, the words "contains asbestos" used in the standard
                  wording shall be replaced by "contains crocidolite/blue asbestos".

                  Member States may exclude from the provision of the first subparagraph articles
                  intended to be placed on the market in their territory. The labelling of these articles
                  must however bear the wording "contains asbestos";

            (d)   if labelling takes the form of direct printing on the articles, a single colour
                  contrasting with the background colour is sufficient.
30.12.2006         EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/841




2.       The label mentioned in this Appendix shall be affixed in accordance with the following
         rules:

         (a)      on each of the smallest units supplied;

         (b)      if an article has asbestos-based components, it is sufficient for these components only
                  to bear the label. The labelling may be dispensed with if smallness of size or
                  unsuitability of packaging make it impossible for a label to be affixed to the
                  component.
L 396/842            EN                Official Journal of the European Union                     30.12.2006


3.          Labelling of packaged articles containing asbestos

            3.1. The following particulars shall appear on clearly legible and indelible labelling on
                 the packaging of packaged articles containing asbestos:

                 (a)      the symbol and relevant indications of danger in accordance with this Annex;

                 (b)      safety instructions which must be selected in accordance with the particulars in
                          this Annex, inasmuch as they are relevant for the particular article.

                 Where additional safety information is provided on the packaging, this shall not
                 weaken or contradict the particulars given in accordance with points (a) and (b).

            3.2. Labelling in accordance with 3.1 shall be effected by means of:

                 –        a label firmly affixed to the packaging, or

                 –        a (tie-on) label securely attached to the package, or

                 –        direct printing of the packaging.

            3.3. Articles containing asbestos and which are packaged only in loose plastic wrapping
                 or the like shall be regarded as packaged articles and shall be labelled in accordance
                 with 3.2. If articles are separated from such packages and placed on the market
                 unpackaged, each of the smallest units supplied shall be accompanied by labelling
                 particulars in accordance with 3.1.
30.12.2006       EN                Official Journal of the European Union                        L 396/843


4.       Labelling of unpackaged articles containing asbestos

         For unpackaged articles containing asbestos, labelling in accordance with 3.1 shall be
         effected by means of:

         –     a label firmly affixed to the article containing asbestos,

         –     a (tie-on) label securely attached to such an article,

         –     direct printing on the articles,

         or, if the abovementioned is not reasonably practicable as in the case of, for example,
         smallness of size of the article, the unsuitable nature of the article's properties or certain
         technical difficulties by means of a hand-out with labelling in accordance with 3.1.

5.       Without prejudice to Community provisions on safety and hygiene at work, the label
         affixed to the article which may, in the context of its use, be processed or finished, shall be
         accompanied by any safety instructions which may be appropriate for the article
         concerned, and in particular by the following:

         –     operate if possible out of doors or in a well-ventilated place,

         –     preferably use hand tools or low-speed tools equipped, if necessary, with an
               appropriate dust-extraction facility. If high-speed tools are used, they should always
               be equipped with such a facility,
L 396/844          EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                      30.12.2006


            –     if possible, dampen before cutting or drilling,

            –     dampen dust and place it in a properly closed receptacle and dispose of it safely.

6.          The labelling of any article intended for domestic use which is not covered by section 5
            and which is likely, during use, to release asbestos fibres shall, if necessary, contain the
            following safety instruction: "replace when worn".

7.          The labelling of articles containing asbestos shall be in the official language or languages
            of the Member State(s) where the article is placed on the market.
30.12.2006        EN          Official Journal of the European Union                          L 396/845


                                          Appendix 8

                                  Point 43 – Azocolourants

                                   List of aromatic amines

             CAS number    Index number            EC number                  Substances

1      92-67-1            612-072-00-6          202-177-1              biphenyl-4-ylamine

                                                                       4-aminobiphenyl

                                                                       xenylamine

2      92-87-5            612-042-00-2          202-199-1              benzidine

3      95-69-2                                  202-441-6              4-chloro-o-toluidine

4      91-59-8            612-022-00-3          202-080-4              2-naphthylamine

5      97-56-3            611-006-00-3          202-591-2              o-aminoazotoluene

                                                                       4-amino-2',3-
                                                                       dimethylazobenzene

                                                                       4-o-tolylazo-o-toluidine

6      99-55-8                                  202-765-8              5-nitro-o-toluidine

7      106-47-8           612-137-00-9          203-401-0              4-chloroaniline

8      615-05-4                                 210-406-1              4-methoxy-m-
                                                                       phenylenediamine

9      101-77-9           612-051-00-1          202-974-4              4,4'-methylenedianiline

                                                                       4,4'-
                                                                       diaminodiphenylmethane
L 396/846         EN         Official Journal of the European Union                         30.12.2006


            CAS number    Index number            EC number                  Substances

10     91-94-1           612-068-00-4          202-109-0              3,3'-dichlorobenzidine

                                                                      3,3'-dichlorobiphenyl-
                                                                      4,4'-ylenediamine

11     119-90-4          612-036-00-X          204-355-4              3,3'-dimethoxybenzidine

                                                                      o-dianisidine

12     119-93-7          612-041-00-7          204-358-0              3,3'-dimethylbenzidine

                                                                      4,4'-bi-o-toluidine

13     838-88-0          612-085-00-7          212-658-8              4,4'-methylenedi-o-
                                                                      toluidine

14     120-71-8                                204-419-1              6-methoxy-m-toluidine

                                                                      p-cresidine

15     101-14-4          612-078-00-9          202-918-9              4,4'-methylene-bis-(2-
                                                                      chloro-aniline)

                                                                      2,2'-dichloro-4,4'-
                                                                      methylene-dianiline

16     101-80-4                                202-977-0              4,4'-oxydianiline

17     139-65-1                                205-370-9              4,4'-thiodianiline
30.12.2006        EN          Official Journal of the European Union                            L 396/847


             CAS number    Index number            EC number                  Substances

18     95-53-4            612-091-00-X          202-429-0              o-toluidine

                                                                       2-aminotoluene

19     95-80-7            612-099-00-3          202-453-1              4-methyl-m-
                                                                       phenylenediamine

20     137-17-7                                 205-282-0              2,4,5-trimethylaniline

21     90-04-0            612-035-00-4          201-963-1              o-anisidine

                                                                       2-methoxyaniline

22     60-09-3            611-008-00-4          200-453-6              4-amino azobenzene
L 396/848       EN             Official Journal of the European Union                           30.12.2006


                                           Appendix 9

                                   Point 43 – Azocolourants

                                         List of azodyes

            CAS number      Index number          EC number                     Substances

1      Not allocated       611-070-00-2        405-665-4                A mixture of: disodium
                                                                        (6-(4-anisidino)-3-
       Component 1:                                                     sulfonato-2-(3,5-dinitro-2-
                                                                        oxidophenylazo)-1-
       CAS-No:                                                          naphtholato)(1-(5-chloro-
       118685-33-9                                                      2-oxidophenylazo)-2-
                                                                        naphtholato)chromate(1-);
       C39H23ClCrN7O12S.
       2Na                                                              trisodium bis(6-(4-
                                                                        anisidino)-3-sulfonato-2-
       Component 2:                                                     (3,5-dinitro-2-
                                                                        oxidophenylazo)-1-
       C46H30CrN10O20S2.
                                                                        naphtholato)chromate(1-)
       3Na
30.12.2006      EN                 Official Journal of the European Union                   L 396/849


                                              Appendix 10

                                       Point 43 – Azocolourants

                                        List of testing methods

   European           Reference and title of the standard             Reference      Reference of the
Standardisation                                                       document     superseded standard
Organisation (*)

      CEN            Leather – Chemical tests –                     CEN ISO/TS           NONE
                     Determination of certain azo                   17234:2003
                     colorants in dyed leathers

      CEN            Textiles – Methods for the                  EN 14362-1:2003         NONE
                     determination of certain aromatic
                     amines derived from azo colorants –
                     Part 1: Detection of the use of certain
                     azo colorants accessible without
                     extraction

      CEN            Textiles – Methods for determination        EN 14362-2:2003         NONE
                     of certain aromatic amines derived
                     from azo colorants – Part 2:
                     Detection of the use of certain azo
                     colorants accessible by extracting the
                     fibres

(*)      ESO: European Standardisation Organisations:

CEN: rue de Stassart 36, B-1050 Bruxelles; tel. (32-2) 550 08 11,
fax: (32-2) 550 08 19. http://www.cenorm.be

CENELEC: rue de Stassart 36, B-1050 Bruxelles; tel. (32-2) 519 68 71,
fax: (32-2) 519 69 19. http://www.cenelec.org

ETSI: 650, route des Lucioles, F-06921 Sophia Antipolis; tel. (33) 492 94 42 00,
fax: (33) 493 65 47 16. http://www.etsi.org
